(bold music) ♪ Show them ♪
- Okay, so I was listening to the Wired podcast this morning and they said something that really nailed the way I think about a lot of emerging
technologies, especially AI. What they said was WWDC,
which we just had from Apple, basically proved that AI is
a feature, not a product, and this hit so hard for me, because that's the exact question that we've been asking
ourselves for so long here about new stuff. Is it a feature or a product? So, I'll give you an example. Do you remember Clubhouse? We've talked about this before, but Clubhouse back in the 2020s, like, the pandemic era, it was this meteoric rise to success. There was this platform that was just live audio stage events that would disappear after they were over, and that's kind of all it was. It was super simple, but with
everybody sitting at home, it blew up in popularity. It skyrockets to the top of the App Store. Everyone starts using it. It had major interviews happen on it. Major new weekly shows were created on it. There were huge famous people participating in Clubhouses regularly. But fast forward literally
one year, maybe two, and suddenly Spotify had built
this feature into their app, Discord had built the
feature into their app. They built Stages. Slack had built it into their app. Even Twitter had built it into their app. They've got Spaces now. And so suddenly, it was just a feature inside of these larger apps. So, the question became is Clubhouse, this huge thing that came outta nowhere, is this a product or is it just a feature, and it turned out the success
of all of the features and all the other apps that built it in meant that Clubhouse would just die, like, and a lot of the other
ones eventually ended up dying. I think we still have Twitter Spaces, but generally it just became a feature. And there are actually
many examples of these, which is why the product
versus feature question still keeps coming up over and over again. So now, the newest question. Is AI a product or a feature, because we got to see what it looked like as a standalone product. Like, we just had in 2024,
we had the Humane AI Pin, which was a dedicated piece of hardware specifically for engaging with an AI. We got the Rabbit r1, another device that promised to be, like, this physical embodiment of an assistant you have everywhere. Now, both these devices were bad and they didn't work very well, but let's say they did. Let's say they actually
worked well and were fine. That would be AI as a product, and you could even consider, like, going to the ChatGPT
website and using it there as AI as a product. But then fast forward now
to just a few months later and we just had Apple's WWDC, and we also just had Google I/O, and very different approach. Like, look what happened with Apple. Just like clockwork, they went through and systematically added
all these AI features sprinkled throughout a bunch
of its operating systems. So, for example, inside of any app with the ability to write text, you now have these
writing tools that pop up that are powered by
these new language models that can help you summarize, or proofread, or change the tone or
style of your writing, and then there's also
a new Siri, you know, powered by these language models again, so it can hold conversations better and understand context better and use a semantic index to parse info about various files and
things on your device and bring them into Siri's understanding. You can literally generate images as a feature on your device. You can generate emojis. The list goes on, but the point is it's
clearly a very different way of thinking about AI for the consumer, where it's just one of the features built into the thing that you use. Now, I realize this
isn't a perfect analogy. I think probably the biggest flaw being that, you know, when
they integrated these features, like when Slack, when
Twitter built Spaces, when they built these features, they didn't integrate Clubhouse
into those bigger websites. They actually just took the
idea of what Clubhouse is, which is just a live audio event on stage and they built it themselves
into their own apps, so Clubhouse was left to die. But in this specific case with Apple, it's actually a combination of two things. It's them building a
bunch of their own models to do a lot of these things on device, but then also them literally
building a ChatGPT wrapper into a lot of their OS, so ChatGPT actually gets
more users this way. So, I thought this was fun to think about. Now, there is no answer yet as far as is AI actually
a feature or a product? Which one will win? Which
one will lose? We don't know. But I think if history is any indication, I do think that more
people in the long run are going to end up using
this AI stuff as a feature more than going to,
like, a standalone thing. Like, I was looking back
for other examples of this, and I honestly found it really
hard to find any examples of the other way around happening, where the individual product
becomes far more successful than the same idea
being baked as a feature into something larger. Like, I think TikTok is
maybe the best example of this opposite version, where TikTok is, it's a
vertical video carousel with an algorithm that
learns really quickly what video you wanna see next, right? That's what TikTok is. Like, we've seen Instagram Reels develop that exact same thing. Now it's a huge feature for them. Same thing with YouTube Shorts. We've got all of YouTube,
but inside of YouTube is this vertically-scrolling
carousel with an algorithm. But I still think today,
we would say TikTok is the most popular version of that idea, so the standalone version
is winning currently over it being built in as a feature. And maybe Snapchat is another one, kinda? Like, Snapchat stories was one of the biggest
features in Snapchat, and then that kinda got ripped into being a feature everywhere else. Like, everyone has stories, but Snapchat by itself is doing well. But anyway, the question is
do you have to get all the way to the level of Snapchat or TikTok in order to be successful
as a standalone product to defeat the fact that your thing could just become a feature somewhere? But yeah, that is now
the question with AI. It just struck me as such
a difference in approach between the product and
the feature version of it, and it also struck me that, yeah, it feels like Rabbit and Humane were kinda doomed from the start because there's no way
they would also develop all the other benefits of the big things, those being smartphones. But also one more quick
thing I wanted to highlight that I don't think got as much attention as it maybe deserved, which is all of these models
that we've been talking about with WWDC, all of the models under the
umbrella of Apple Intelligence, the diffusion model, the
image generation model, the language models
are all built by Apple. Like, there was a whole moment on Twitter with a lot of confusion over just how integrated
ChatGPT is into iOS. I think it's actually not
really that integrated at all. So, Apple had to go through the work of obviously making all these models, but also training them all, and so we've asked Apple about this. They've had to go through
finding publicly available data, and licensing, and doing that whole dance, and spending the millions and
millions of dollars required to make these models work. So, that is a really
higher barrier to entry, but it's only the once in a while that the request is complex enough or deals with enough real-world data, which isn't in Apple's training, that it actually asks, "Okay,
can I go out to ChatGPT?" and it asks every single time, which feels about as
unintegrated as it gets, but generally I think
this is gonna be something that's really hard for other companies, for any new companies to pull off. This might be the last big
set of models we get to see. So, unless you're Apple or
Google or Microsoft or OpenAI or any of the other
massive ones that are safe, because they'll get integrated now, probably don't have much of a shot. But either way, this has
been really interesting to think about. AI, is it a product or a feature? Can it be both, or does it
have to be one or the other, and one wins and the other loses? Let me know what you think in
the comments section below. We'll hang out there. Either way, thanks for watching,
thanks for subscribing, and I'll catch you guys in the next one. Peace. (bold music)