♪ Instrumental
orchestral music ♪ Voiceover: Apple Intelligence
in five minutes. It's personal intelligence
right where you need it -- on your Mac, iPad, and iPhone. Writing tools are an example
of the incredible power of Apple Intelligence. Say you're writing an email. You can change the tone
to make it sound more friendly, professional, or concise. Another way Writing Tools
can help you is with Proofread. With Proofread,
you can nail the grammar, word choice,
and sentence structure. And if you've rambled on
in your email, bring out the key points
and add them as a TL;DR. ♪ Instrumental jungle music ♪ Apple Intelligence is also great
when it comes to images. Let's jump in with Genmoji. You want a T-rex on a surfboard? You've got a T-rex
on a surfboard. Simply type a description
of the emoji you want. How about a smiley face
with cucumber eyes? Or something random,
like a squirrel DJ? And because
Apple Intelligence knows who's in your photo library,
you can turn your friend, Vee, into an astronaut. Next up, Image Playground. Create awesome images
in seconds. Like an image
of a cat as a chef. Just type Rooftop and any other
descriptive words, and it generates the image
in the middle playground area. Then choose a style,
like Animation, Sketch, or Illustration, and it's done. [MESSAGE SENT TONE] Apple Intelligence
also understands who people are
in your photo library, so you can create
a personalized image of them for their birthday. Or your mom as a superhero. Image Wand can transform
your rough sketch into a polished image. You can use Apple Pencil
to circle it, and Image Wand analyzes
your sketch and words and creates an image for you,
like magic. Siri takes a huge step forward
and is now supercharged by Apple Intelligence. And when you talk to Siri, you'll notice this elegant
glowing light around the edge of your screen that shows Apple Intelligence
working for you. With Natural Language, you can
speak to Siri more naturally, thanks to richer language
understanding capabilities. So if you stumble over words, Siri still understands
what you're getting at. iPhone user: What's the weather
tomorrow morning at Muir Beach --
I mean, Muir Woods? Siri: The forecast
is calling for clear skies in the morning near
Muir Woods National Monument. Voiceover: Siri also remembers what you've just
been talking about. iPhone user: Create an event
for a hike there tomorrow at 9:00 a.m. Siri: Hike is scheduled
for 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m. on June 11. Voiceover: Next, Personal
Context draws from your photos, calendar events, messages,
and other apps. So let's say your mom
is coming to visit. Simply ask... iPhone user: Siri,
when is mom's flight landing? Voiceover: And Siri already
knows who mom is, and will cross-reference
flight details from an email to give you an up-to-date
arrival time. And if you've forgotten what
plans you have, you can say... iPhone user:
What's our dinner plan? Voiceover: And Siri knows
you mean you and your mom and will find that information
in a text she sent you. And if you don't want
to ask Siri out loud, you can now type to Siri. Just a double tap
at the bottom of the screen, and you can quickly and quietly
type your Siri request. ♪ Because Apple Intelligence
is personal, Priority Notifications
show what's important to you by putting the most important
ones at the top of the stack. Personal Intelligence
can also make you the star in your very own Memory Movie. It understands
who's in your photo library, so you can just ask Photos
to create a movie about Leo learning to fish. And it'll whip up a film
starring Leo, water, fishing rods, and depending on
how successful Leo was, a fish! So those are just a few
of the ways Apple Intelligence can help you every day. It's super easy to use
and gives you peace of mind knowing it's designed
with privacy from the ground up. So that's Apple Intelligence. AI for the rest of us. ♪