- In a world where machines
have become creative and redesigned by algorithm, there's only one thing
to save the human race. Blow (beep) up. Or you could just watch this session. I'm sure that's a much
less violent way to do it. (dramatic music) ♪ Give a shadow of the steel behemoths ♪ - So we're gonna blow some things up. And the lyrics that you just
heard on that rock intro, that hype music to walk me in, what if I told you no human ever sang them and no guitarist ever
strummed those guitars? That was prompted music. And we are living in a
synthetic media reality. We're living in a reality
where so much of what we do, hear, see, and experience
now is generated by machines, thankfully, mostly prompted
by humans right now, but more and more of
that is going to change. And that is going to change the way that we do the work of the future. I'm gonna talk a lot about that today. And as you mentioned,
my name is Ian Beacraft. I'm the CEO of Signal and Cipher. And we help companies understand how AI is going to impact the
future of their industry and chart a course for what their profitable future is going to be. So when we talk about AI, obviously there hasn't
been another single session on it at all this whole time. So we're gonna start with some real hype with Alexander Wong saying, "AI is the holy grail of all technologies. "There won't be another
technology as transformative." Some of us can go along with this. "The most shocking thing
that nature ever produced "was intelligence of humanity." I agree with that. "We are now at a precipice of
replicating that in silicon." Brave new world. Starting high. But in a few years, AI
is just gonna be assumed. We're gonna talk about it the
same way that we do digital. How many of us talk about
digital today as an advantage? The thing you need to
be paying attention to? It was at one point. I remember those days. We're in the same moment with AI. But pretty soon, we won't. So those of you who have
it in your sales deck as we're an AI-powered company, you've got about six weeks
for that deck to still matter. And we're in a world where things are moving so incredibly fast. Just a few weeks ago, we had the release of three incredible models all on one day. We had Sora, which blew everybody's minds, and then we had the release of Gemini 1.5, and also V-JEPA, which got
almost no love, unfortunately, but that was a meta-model
that was about vision. And all of that happened on
the same day, on a Tuesday. Now, that was kind of
earth-shaking when it happened. But now it's just a typical Tuesday. And it's gonna be a typical
Tuesday going forward, on and on and on and on. And we had clues this was coming. We just didn't see them in
a lot of different places. This is data from where things
were going with archive.org. Archive.org is an amazing
place to get information about the research that's happening behind machine intelligence
and artificial intelligence. And we saw an exponential
rise in the number of studies being posted on Archive around 2020. And as you can tell, the commercialization follows the science. When the science has a tear like that, you can see that people are
gonna come behind pretty quickly and wanna monetize that. And that's exactly what
we're experiencing now. We're experiencing the
fruits of that effort in the way we're interacting
with these models. So, to take that exponential
bend a little bit harder, one of our friends who
presented a few days ago, Ray Kurzweil, talks about the
law of accelerating returns. And essentially saying that
these moments of salience become closer and closer
and closer together. The gap between major
earth-shaking developments closes so fast to the
point where eventually we can barely even perceive the difference between one to the next evolution. And one of the challenges of
this for us as human beings is that we're not really built
to see things exponentially. We are linear human beings. Thinking in exponentials
just isn't in our nature. We weren't evolved to
think or act that way. So, if I walk 30 paces this way, I have a pretty good understanding of where I'm going to end up. I mean, I'm definitely
gonna fall off this stage, but I can guess linearly pretty well. What I have a hard time with is, let's say it's not 30 steps linearly, but 30 steps exponentially,
where do I land? Some people would say
definitely a different room, maybe a different
building, different town. Some people would say a different state. But 30 paces exponentially
would land me on the moon. That is the difference between the stage and a new planetary mission. That is how hard it is
to think exponentially, but that's the world we're inhabiting now, where everything seems to be moving at that exponential pace. And that is gonna be informing a lot of what I talk about today in terms of how we
adjust our mental models for the work that we are going
to be doing on a daily basis. So, if we talk about
2050, by the year 2050, we will be experiencing
100 years of progress at the current rate of progress today. So, in the year 2024, the rate of progress that I just talked about a moment ago of a typical Tuesday, 100 years of that type of
progress every five years. That's gonna be wild. And with that, that exponential change comes a lot of disruption and friction for the companies that we work for and the work that we do. This is called Martec's Law. And Martec's Law states that
technology moves exponentially, but organizations and people
progress logarithmically. And as you can see, just here, we have a decent level of friction between what's happening with
the technological progress and the human progress and
the organizational progress. There's this gap in between the two. That tension creates disruption. Whether from the technology itself or from an outside disruptor, someone can come in and disrupt this particular organization. Now, if you're really good, and you're fast, and you're agile, you can push that logarithmic
curve up a little bit, but you can't outrun it. One example of this is Google. 18 months ago, we had this
experimental chatbot pop up that nobody had heard of
before, this ChatGPT thing. And all of a sudden,
within the last 18 months, Google has now re-engineered
its entire product line. As Satya Nadella said,
"We're gonna make 'em dance." But it's not just Google, it's everybody. This is a harbinger of things to come. It will be for everyone who is going to be playing in this game. And the fun thing to
note is that these models are improving with their
capabilities and capacity by five to 10x per year. So if we take that
exponential in mind yet again, we're looking at a minimum
of 3,125 times better than they are today,
or 100,000 times better than they are today by this date in 2029, five years from today. So if you're looking
at imagery and saying, "It has a sixth finger!" I think it might be
able to figure that out when it's 100,000 times
better than it is today. Let that sink in though, because as we interact
with these chatbots, these models, imagery, and we're
prompting with these things you might have issues with
the state of where it is and think, "Okay, this isn't working. "It'll never get there." The second someone says,
"It'll never get there," come on. The rate of change is so fast and so fast we've already seen things
go from wildly underrated to Sora-level quality
in just a couple years. 100,000 times better? That's gonna be a pretty crazy week. Now, the challenge with this though is AI really isn't that
competitive advantage. I talked about this earlier saying, "You have six weeks to keep
that in your sales deck," and AI is just expected. We don't just need AI. We need a completely new
business operating system to be able to accommodate the changes that AI is going to force. There's this old adage
that we shape our tools and then our tools shape us. AI is doing a pretty darn good job of shaping what we pay attention to. Just look at this room. So if AI is something that
we need to be thinking about with the work that we're doing, what are the new models for work and how we're going to be
performing that in the future? Well, it's definitely on
the mind of a lot of CEOs because 45% of them
believe that if things go as they are today, their
company won't be viable if it stays on its current
path within 10 years. That's pretty shocking. Almost 50% of CEOs
think that there's a lot to be figured out if they're going to stay a viable going concern. So what this gets to is this idea of business transformation, digital transformation,
business transformation. It's a hot topic. It's something that a lot
of consultant companies make a lot of money on. It's something that most
companies think they have to do in order to keep up. The challenge is we're now in a cycle where things are moving exponentially. So just doing a discrete session of business transformation isn't enough because by the time you finish,
you're already behind again. We're now in an era where regeneration, constant regeneration is necessary, not just one moment of transformation. And that changes the
framework a little bit of how we go about the
work we're gonna be doing. But one of the challenges
that we encounter when we're trying to make these changes are that the mental models of yesterday are starting to collide with
the technologies of tomorrow. Rishad Tobaccowala says it that the future does not fit the containers of the past. It's beautiful. I love that because it's so true. And yet every time we
encounter a new technology, we always treat it with
the same frameworks that we did from what we know. Marshall McLuhan says that the new media always imitates the old. And we come to things
with a preconceived notion of how they should
operate until we find out how they should operate natively. That takes time. That paradigm shift
doesn't happen overnight. And we're currently experiencing that. So many companies are
coming at AI by saying, just drop it on the tech stack. Pour some magical pixie dust on top of it. We've got AI. And ultimately, if you don't work on this, you really don't rise to the
level of your expectations. We fall to the level of our systems. And the reason I bring this up is because we need to change the way that
we think about work itself if we're going to survive the
AI era with our jobs intact. And I personally believe that our systems for work are broken. I think a lot of you
probably feel the same way. Many of you probably have
been pretty damn burnt out with the work that you've been doing over the last few years. There's more and more
and more expected of us every single day. And there's almost no way of keeping up. And it's mostly because
a lot of the elements for how we measure success
are from a bygone era. Productivity measurements come from the industrial revolution. They're meant for outputs and widgets, not human knowledge work. We adapted it for that. And we did a shoddy job at best. So we're gonna take that, not just past the industrial revolution, but into the AI revolution
and say, we're good. I don't think that's gonna work. So I think you're
probably with me on this. I don't think I have to tell
you to take the red pill, but he better damn do it. Okay, good, he didn't check it out. - Let's get started. - So we're all on the same page. I personally believe that rather than AI, poor leadership, blind
adherence to old systems, and a tech-first mindset
are actually a bigger threat to the jobs that we have than AI. The boogeyman of the AI
saying AI is gonna come and take your job because
it's gonna mechanize it, it's gonna digitize it, all of a sudden you're no longer relevant. Again, we're talking about
the frameworks of the past. If we do nothing and just
adopt the technology, yeah, sure, that might
be the way it happens. But there's so much that needs to change about our relationship with
work to make this successful. And the problem with
so many of these ideas of how this is going to work is it starts with the technology. We're technology-first,
not framework-first, not challenge-first. We're not focusing on the
problems that we're solving. We're saying this is really
cool, focus on the tech. And you see it in the examples
that show up in the news. We asked ChatGPT about
the future of our species. We've already deified this thing. We've said this is the all-knowing oracle that can teach us so much about ourselves when it's trained on our
own data from the internet. We've already seeded. But if you really wanna figure out what we can be focusing on
that's gonna make the difference, the use cases that are really important are things that involve
people, opportunities, process, frameworks, constraints. This is where we need
to be focusing our time and then saying, once we've figured out how these are optimized, how do we add AI to make it even better? Not how do we put the
cart before the horse and say AI's the thing, now
everybody adapt around it. But that's exactly how we
do digital transformation. When we do a digital installation, we do some sort of
technological initiative, we always say, we're gonna install this, IT's gonna spend a year and a half putting this new system in place, and everyone's just gonna
have to adapt around it. Deal with it. Doesn't work anymore. So how do we do this? Well, ultimately, this new era of work depends on how we see
ourselves as workers. How do we see our jobs,
the work that we do? And if you take a look at
a typical organization, this is how that shows up. We have a bunch of different departments, employees that kinda can't
go in between departments in their own jobs. The average organization sees
an employee as a line item in a specific department that has specific KPIs and measurements. You do this function in
this department in this way, and maybe you'll stick around
and you'll get a promotion. You don't move in between departments. As you can see, the idea
of department number three, if you're trying to
move between, you can't because you have a specific job that fits within a specific place. You have a boss, they oversee
you, that's how work goes. Now, everyone has a set of
skills within those jobs. Those jobs are built
around a set of skills that are required for the functions and the work that we'll do. So that's kind of signified
by these dots you see here, and those are gonna play a
little bit of a starring role in the next few slides. Now, if we're gonna go
beyond just the idea of jobs, let's talk about what it looks like to be a creative generalist, and I'm gonna talk about
that concept quite a bit. But each person, essentially themselves, not just the jobs, the jobs
require specific skills to get those done, but each
person has a set of skills that they bring to the table, and that is kind of contained
within this hexagon. But you have a lot of skills
you don't put into play in work, at work all the time, because, well, work
doesn't ask that of you. You're not required to do that. But I personally believe
that this is the era of the creative generalist. And the creative generalist is somebody who isn't just an expert in one domain. They're not just a specialist. We grew up in an era
that said, go to school, get a degree, get really
good at something, and then build expertise
in that particular domain to the point where you
can become promotable and have a defensible
place in the workforce. And AI kind of throws
a wrench in that plan, because AI allows us to
abstract years of discipline, expertise, and effort necessary to perform at a decent level in
hundreds of different skills. We've all experienced it. How many of you are
absolutely crap at art, but can now use Midjourney
to do something pretty cool? That's just with one specific skillset. It's going to happen with
practically every skillset you can imagine. Abstracting, again, that
work and effort necessary to perform proficiently in
so many different areas. Now, what that does, and the
reason that's interesting from an expertise or a
creative generalist perspective is that all of a sudden,
a lot of those skillsets that have been dormant in my job, I can now bring to the
table with the power of AI and perform them at a level
that can provide value for my organization. It's no longer something
that I'm told don't do that because you're not good enough to do it or don't do that because
our company doesn't need it. Don't do that, it's not your job. That's going to change wildly. And you can see at the edges of this, it says the adjacent possible. Well, these are adjacent possibilities based on skillsets and
interests that you might have. A creative generalist isn't just somebody who has a depth of
expertise in one subject. They have a depth of expertise
in multiple subjects, but more importantly, they
have a large cross section of interests, hobbies,
expertise, and exposure. And those elements,
that is what helps them make connections between the
things they're an expert in and the things they're
just aware of or good at. If you know what success looks like, at that point, you don't
need to have the years and decades of experience to make it so. You simply need to know
how to direct the tools and orchestrate the AI to
help you make that happen. So a creative generalist, you
can see where those edges are with the lines, you've
now expanded your skillset and the productive capacity
you can bring to the office and bring to your team
beyond just that hexagon, which is what was expected
of you in the prior era. So this looks different for everybody. Person one's adjacent
possible looks very different than person two. And all that comes together when you have one person
doing adjacent possible work, you have that person growing at a rate that is far beyond linear because they're adding net new skillsets. They're not just improving in a skillset that they bring to work. They're improving in skillsets they hadn't brought to work before. And that's huge. But when you have multiple
people doing this, not just one, but two, sometimes three, whole teams, whole companies, all of a sudden, you
combine those skillsets in the surface area that
these people can cover is so much wider. And the capability of these
teams becomes massive. Small teams, massive impact. - In my little group chat
with my tech CEO friends, there's this betting
pool for the first year that there's a one person
billion dollar company, which would have been
unimaginable without AI and now will happen. - One billion dollar, one person company. Now, that company will
likely look like one person and tens of thousands of
bots to make it happen. But the idea of small
teams with massive impact, there's a saying going around saying, the small team is now the ultimate flex. How does your small team
have an outsized impact? That's a new metric. That fits outside the framework of the typical workflow that we see. We're not all focused on the efficiencies that how can we have a massive
outsized impact as our team. What new capability can you
bring to your team in this way? What new value can you bring? That's a new way of
essentially bringing metrics that can be measured to the organization that weren't possible before. And when we talk about the
future of organizations, the future of organizations
will be agent driven. Essentially driven by bots
that can spin up other bots to get actions done. One of the most important skills of the next generation of work is not how do you do a
specific type of work. It's how do you orchestrate
the resources at your disposal to do the work for you. This is what's called a Haas framework. And a Haas framework is
essentially a framework driven around a bot structure that has all sorts of governance built in. And it's a bot that can spin up other bots to do specialized types of work. We use this and it's incredibly powerful at very specific types of
work that can be automated across several specialized bots that hand things off to each other. And this kind of is a
signal of where things are gonna be going in the
work that we do today. Today, there's automation
and there are humans that get work done. And automation is seen as a
way of reducing head count, reducing work and sometimes
scaling the amount of work that a small team can do. But the real trifecta
of the future of work is teams that are built
between humans and AIs interacting together. And automation being a
foundational layer underneath that. So I told you these dots
were gonna come back. If we're taking a look
at creative generalists and what they look like, you saw those dots were
kind of uniform before 'cause they were kind of boxed in to that really narrow container
of what they could do. All of a sudden, as a creative generalist, I've got skills that are enhanced by AI that can fit not just the
specific job that I have, but also be lent to other departments based on a specific task or
project that might come up. I call this just-in-time
skills and expertise on demand. This is something that these bots and these AIs allow you to do. You don't just have to do the
work of your own department. Many of us here have had
experience with this, just not with AI. During COVID, in the lockdown, a lot of companies built up
internal gig marketplaces, saying, "Hey, we wanna really leverage "the talent we have here. "We know that there are people here "that have skills
outside of the boundaries "of the work that they do. "Let's bring you in. "Let's do this together." Well, that was done specifically
to make efficiencies based on the things that were
demanded of us at that time. That's no longer just a special case. That's every day with AI. Focusing on work that is based
on projects and not roles, on skills and not jobs. So if we're gonna kind of break this down a little bit further, we have skills of individual workers, we have automations, and we have things that
can be augmented by AI. So now we're starting to see
those dots that were there change some colors. And what we have for blue is
something that's augmented by AI. Black is stuff that is taken away or abstracted by automation. Now, the idea of automating things away can be very frightening because people see things
that they do automated and all of a sudden feel at threat of having their job taken away. And if you do this within the framework of the way work goes today, of jobs and job holders, instead of skills and tasks and projects, yeah, having something you do automated means there are fewer tasks
and things for you to do that are defensible now. And it's eating away at
the value that you have in the organization. But if you take a look at it
from this type of framework, as a creative generalist, yes, you might have one or two things that are abstracted away
from that automation, but look at the other surface area of the impact that you can have. And that just keeps widening and widening. Instead of being in this hierarchical, top-down constrained system, we are now fluid and
moving across departments a ways that the atomic units of work are far more flexible. So, again, when it comes
to the work that we do, if we take a look at the
traditional structures of work, automation is threatening. But for a creative generalist, that's just the dynamic nature of work. Things are coming up,
they're ebbing and flowing, they change, different
elements of automation come into play, and
then different elements of their skill sets are augmented based on the development of
these models and these tools. That changes all the time. Remember, that dynamic
change never slows down. So what does this mean? Jobs are dead. But work isn't. It changes the conversation
about AI taking away jobs. Yes, I'm not sitting here saying, or standing here saying that
it won't take away jobs. It will. But it will take away
more jobs in a system that is defined by jobs and job holders, these discrete units, that supposedly can be
replaced by these automations. And far less of this
will be taking away jobs when we're thinking
about people with skills being matched with projects and tasks based on their abilities and the augmentation of AI. All of a sudden, so much more adaptable. So what's the secret sauce
of a creative generalist? How are they so massively
effective with AI? Well, one of the most important things is encoding knowledge. And that is essentially the codification of things like expertise,
process and procedures that can be done and built into things like GPTs, models and AIs. Many of you have built your own GPTs. That's an example of
encoding your knowledge. And we're getting to a point where these generative
models are available for individual's enterprise. So I can encode knowledge
based on my own skills and expertise and organizations can do it based on certain functions
of teams and individuals. All of a sudden, something
that might be the domain of a specific expert on a team and locked by its constrained resources is now available across
the entire organization and high level skills are
available at the edges where the problems are being encountered. So essentially, this
is knowledge management with applied AI. Knowledge management's not new, but with the power of AI, the scalability and effectiveness
is exponentially higher. And pretty low key version of this, many of you have uploaded documents to Anthropic, ChatGPT and said, "Hey, help me analyze this. "This is something I wrote. "Help me understand how
these things relate." Now when you start to
scale that to a point where the bots and LMs
can read and analyze everything you've ever written, all of a sudden you can start to encode not just what you do, but a decent bit of who you are as well. And we're now at a point
where our context windows are getting pretty darn large. With Gemini, it's available
at one million tokens, which basically means
thousands of documents. And even in the lab, they're able to do it
at 10 million tokens. That's absolutely stymieing. So what does this mean for privacy? Well, you can bet that Tim Cook has something to say about that. And the ability to take these models and be able to train them on your work is going to be more and more focused on how we are able to
leverage that information rather than giving it to other companies to have it mined like we
did our data in the past. And this is important
because where Apple's going with their large language model approach is going to be based on privacy. And as more and more of our life becomes codified by the data that we're giving these things, privacy is gonna be super important. And ultimately, what this
is going to enable us to do is really enhance the ability
to build a second brain. Some of you might be familiar
with Tiago Forte's concept of building a second brain, which essentially is a repository that helps you manage and
ingest, synthesize knowledge that you're interested in. Things that you know and things
that you're interested in, whether it's clipping articles, annotating websites,
taking notes from podcasts, and making it so you have it available and something you can
synthesize at a moment's notice and deploy it creatively. This is being put on steroids with AI. And this is just a diagram
of all the different places you can start to pull
your information from, to ingest it into your own personal knowledge management system. And with this, now with AI, you can start to create
content, synthesize information, interrogate it, query
it for your own purposes in a myriad of ways. And let's give you some examples of what this looks like in application. So this is a niche example of photography being used for this. This is actually from our
head of creative technology and innovation, Brent Peterson. And he took his entire
photographic library, he is a world-class photographer, he's one of the best brands in the world, adventure photographer, and he trained on his whole library. And 1.8 million images, to create his own large language model. And with that, he was able to create (upbeat music) And that's what he trained it on. So you won't be doing this on your laptop. 1.8 million images, 256 terabytes, four GPUs, six months. But that was last year. And what's amazing about this is you can take something that you have spent a lot of time on, something you have a
large amount of data from, and actually even now, you don't have to have
it with that much data, and be able to scale that, and prompt it, and use it creatively. That was pretty cool. It's like an advertisement treatment for a storyboard that's
way more high-fidelity than the sketches you get in preliminary ideation for advertising. And with something like this, he can just prompt it now, instead of having to go out and do the photography to make it happen. And this is a very formidable machine. But, as we saw earlier, these models are moving at a pace of five to 10x improvement. So six months, that same time the year following, which is gonna be about
six months from now, it takes 10x less. So six months to 15 days. One more year, 15 days
to essentially 30 hours. One more year, we're
down to a couple hours. See where I'm going here? That you can probably do on a laptop. It's amazing where we're going. And if you have that
kind of computing power, think how good Sora's gonna be when you've got billions
in computing power. If you think there were quirks with the way we're doing video today, they ain't gonna be there for long. Just like that. Think of that. And what this also means is that the more and more you can codify yourself in the work that you do, your colleagues will eventually interact with an AI representation of you. What I mean by this is that you can actually train these
models on your likeness, the emails you've written,
the documents you've written, also the work that you're doing so that my agent can
actually talk to your agent, have my people talk to your people. And I probably don't have
to have a meeting with you. Think about it. Most of the meetings
we have, probably 70%, are based on an information asynchronicity that I have information
that I need to give to you that we need to sync on
in order to move forward. Now, if my AI knows precisely where I am and what I'm doing and how I'm doing it, then that can give it to
your AI, that information, and that meeting never has to take place. What would you do with that time back? Well, actually, Microsoft
did a study recently and they show that most of that time would go into deep, focused work. Not meetings, not planning. So we're getting to a point where the AIs can facilitate a lot of that work, the administrative stuff
that gets in the way of deep, focused interaction. So, gets you into meetings. And the other thing it
does is it kinda acts as your assistant in all sorts
of different interactions. Love this one. - Well, this is your first
day joining the company and we're excited to
let you lead a project on our customer, right? So, this is a healthcare client and we want you to
analyze the patient flow and operational process
within the hospital. What kind of proposal that
you would think about? And can you share your
thoughts and we can discuss. - Sure, that's a great question. Let me think about it. - So, based on my
experience as a consultant, I will approach the healthcare project. - Dude's got deep
experience, let me tell you. But as funny as that is,
think about that applied to a slightly more honest scenario where it can actually do triage for you, it can actually help
assist you in real time with questions that can be of value. What looks like cheating today is just gonna be normalcy. It wasn't long ago that using
a calculator was frowned upon, that math teachers actually pro-tested kids using calculators in math class. And eventually they
did and all of a sudden math just got harder, didn't kill math. So, yeah, this is the
start of something new and it looks weird, but it is the future. And for the enterprise, it's
absolutely a cheat code. I can do the same thing
that I did with Brent and that Brent did with his imagery and start to do that on
the corpus of knowledge within an organization. The brand guidelines, the
imagery that we've done, archival footage and documentation, the types of SOPs that we have and also the information
that's in specialist heads to be able to distribute across the team in a way that is scalable. And that's a challenge,
it's a huge challenge because a lot of that stuff
stays within people's heads. What does this solve? Huge things, like the average employee spending 32 days of the
year looking for information to do their job, that is
13% of your payroll wasted. If you're waiting for
a use case to apply AI in your organization, especially retrieval augmented generation, there it is, just saved
you 13%, you're welcome. Beyond that though is it also allows essentially to act as like
an API level connection for other vendors and partners. So as a company gets a robust
setup for this type of AI and trains it on their internal databases, I can use that to empower
external partners. So rather than having to enforce certain things are being done, my partners can actually access that API around archival information,
brand guidelines, whatever that might be
that I'm working with and that can eliminate an
enormous amount of time spent on things like
discovery, spent on compliance, because if I'm building
a large language model based on my internal knowledge base, it's going to be in bounds with what my company needs to build. So let's go beyond just
knowledge and talk about process. He's famous for saying your
margin is my opportunity. And with AI, your process
is my opportunity. This is a really interesting place that causes a lot of tension. We actually played with
this at Signal and Cipher when we talked about
what could it look like to take a business critical process and re-engineer it from scratch. We did this with the brainstorm. We partnered with BCG
to essentially analyze how we could start this from scratch. And what we found was there
were several principles around why these things
didn't work effectively. And rather than just saying,
let's power it by AI, we said, let's rebuild this, see what it could look
like in a perfect world and then power it by AI. So we got a bunch of people together. We got 12 innovation leaders in Atlanta from different industries,
from railway, logistics, airlines, moviemaking, you name it. And we said, y'all are gonna come together and you're gonna figure
out how generative AI impacts the future of moviemaking. We chose moviemaking
because that's something that everybody understands and I don't have to teach you the intricacies of these things. And for one afternoon, we're
all gonna ideate together and create a vision of that future. Now the point wasn't supposed
just to fixate on movies, but to teach people a
new way of doing ideation and brainstorming and design sprints. Of course, with generative
AI at the center. So we talked about using that
adjacent possible framework. So we took these people together, split them into separate teams, said you're gonna compete
against each other as different teams. Magic Kingdom Studios. I think you can figure out who that is. And Mega Media Conglomerates. And you are going to disrupt the industry and plan for the next two years based on what generative AI and trends are going to do with your industry. And with that, they came
up with a hypothesis. Each team said, okay,
our hypothesis is this. And for them, for Magic Kingdom Studios, it was that generative AI
will enable world building at a scale that they've never seen before. So with that, we started to
kind of build out a vision for how that could look. Using one of their IP. Space Wars. Can you figure out what that is? So we started building prototypes of what could look like
to have a Space Wars large language model
that anyone could use. So we took tools that already
existed, like Blockade Labs, and we created an environment. Then we threw that in Unreal Engine, we dropped a Space Wars
trooper into that environment, and created a cinematic. In 15 minutes. We didn't take six weeks. We didn't take five days. 15 minutes. All of a sudden, something
that was an idea, rather than putting it
in a sticky on a wall, is visualized in front of
you in a way that's visceral. You can respond to it. So we kept building these vignettes of what that world could look like. So being able to enable
people with different tools and put yourself into these universes using this technology. This is Wonder Studios, which
was a big hit last year. And talk about different
business lines and ideas that these companies could get into as a result of these generative models. When large language models
can create everything for you, everything's gonna be brand safe. Everything will be something
that creators can use, and all of a sudden you have access to millions of new people who can help you build
the franchise together. And ultimately, that creates a new class of celebrity creator. And that creates a new
cultural relevant event, rather than just watching
this Netflix of Black Mirror, I want to go experience
the new immersive world that a specific celebrity
creator has created. So within this timeframe, we
built a huge set of stories that we're able to visualize,
prototype, and build out. And with this new set of process, when we break it down and
rebuild it from scratch, it's a completely different experience than just sitting in a room and putting squiggles on a whiteboard or stickies on a board for brainstorming. Within this session,
there were 4,000 visuals, hundreds of new concepts visualized, about 12 custom landing pages
for all the participants, two sizzle videos with
one six-person design team in two and a half hours. That would have taken weeks
for a standard agency model. That's not just because
we sprinkled AI on it, it's because we took a look at a process, broke it down to its component parts, and said, "How would we rebuild this "if we could build it from scratch today?" And from there, we started
to build diegetic prototypes of what the world could look like that people would experience. So what would it look like to
be advertised to in this way? And get an Instagram ad saying, "Hey, come become an affiliate "of this new Magic Kingdom Studios "large language model system." And the website that could be built with that IP and licensing in mind. Of course, commercials and concepts. And these diegetic prototypes
are essentially ways to teleport somebody into the future that you're trying to telegraph. Most brainstorms, again,
are just screenshots of stickies on a wall, rather than something
that you can experience and see in front of you. But when you can see a prototype, it allows you to suspend disbelief and push away bias so
that all of a sudden, you can sit in that world
for a moment and say, "Ah, I can see how this
could come to life." Not, "It's never been done that way. "We can't do that." So we decided to expand on this and take a look at a full design sprint. What would it look like
to put the design sprint on steroids, scale that, and compress it? Well, a five-day design sprint
now only takes two days. And instead of five days
of work, up to six months. It's not just AI. It's about looking at the process and rebuilding it from scratch and then powering it with AI. And how do we do this? Well, one of the things I
was talking about earlier is this agentic workflow. Having bots that spin up other bots that pass things around. What you're actually seeing
is an example of that. We use multibot ideation
to help work things through and interrogate ideas together. What you're seeing on the left side, essentially, is that chatbot
working through the process of divergence ideation. And what's happening
on the right-hand side is the spreadsheet in the
back that's being populated for each of the bots to hand ideas and content off to each other. So one bot is creating content that then is picked up by another bot based on signals being
given across to each other. They're interacting with each other. And this also allows
us to be both divergent and create a huge surface
area of exploration of ideas, but also go deep in a moment's notice. This is from an example
where we had an idea about financial wellness
products and said, there's kind of an idea around what if you could talk to your future self and have that guide your decisions? Well, is there any
scientific research on that? Happens to be that there is. And it happens to be that there
are great tools like Elicit that can help you research and
find those scientific studies that actually confirm that information. So either or not, you're
just building a brainstorm based on gut instinct anymore. You have data in the session
that can prove a hypothesis that allows you to build
prototypes quickly. So AI is not about automating creativity. It automates process. You can still be immensely creative with the work that you do. And as Signal and Cipher, we believe that the world and the future is powered by people, but enabled by AI. With that, thank you. (audience applauding) And before we jump into questions, I just have one question for the audience. (speaking in foreign language) (audience cheering) (speaking in foreign language) Yes. (speaking in foreign language) (audience cheering) It really means a lot. You've become my second
home, so thank you. (audience applauding) So we have a few minutes left
for some great questions. The first one that seems
to be voted up the most, if billion dollar companies
can be run by individuals, how can this new era support jobs for the billions of people on earth? Phenomenal question. So this is really about
questions of scale and scarcity. If we are having people in teams that are making billions of dollars based on the current GDP
of trillions of dollars, what does that look like to
be able to support the world and where it's going? That is a question with enormous depth, and we could probably spend all day here just tracing the edges of it, and it'll take decades
for that to play out. And I do believe that we will see teams that reach billions of dollars in value in the near-term future, but just like technology
and technology diffusing, that gap will close over
time as it becomes the norm. So I think that what
we're seeing, for example, Midjourney is an example of a team that at one point was 12 people and did $250 million
in revenue in one year. That's huge. I mean, the outsized value is enormous. And that is going to happen more and more. We're seeing it with Mistral
and other AI startups that are getting to massive
scale in a short period of time. But again, as that becomes
the operating system that is across kind of
like the common system, that gap of value, almost that arbitrage, starts to go away and it becomes standard rather than the billions of dollars. What doesn't go away is the outsized value that any individual can have. But what I think will happen ultimately is team sizes will shrink. The idea of a 200,000-person organization doesn't really fit in that world. But the element of hundreds of millions of new solopreneurs having real
tangible impact on the world does fit within that framework. Let's talk to the next one. If we become super productive and small teams can have a big impact, should we pass on those
productivity games to workers and reduce the eight days work per week? Abso(censored)ing-lutely. Absolutely. I'm a workaholic, I love what I do, but I can't wait for a two-day work week. I mean, it's realistic
that in our lifetimes we will see a four-day work week. The productivity games will be massive. Now, that's not a guarantee. Just because it's possible doesn't mean it's gonna happen. We have to fight for it. We have to demand it
and we have to make it what's on the agenda. So ultimately, when the
benefits start to accrue, they accrue to those who
are already in power. The people who are
already running the show. But it's something that we have to become a part of the conversation around. So if that's something you
want, be loud about it. Make it vocal. So yes, that should go
back to the workers. Because if you take a
look at what's happened with the digital revolution, that did not go to the workers. We found that essentially
what digitization did, it didn't just give power to the masses, it abstracted a certain
kind of decision-making that also created an
entrenched form of power. So there were a lot of people
that didn't benefit from that. Now, when you actually push
knowledge to the edges, and you give people who are at the edges and at the front lines
of the organization, who are dealing with
the problems firsthand, and you give them the power and the tools to solve those challenges, they're no longer beholden
to a chain of command that says, "I am going
to benefit from that." So that changes that power
dynamic significantly. What is the responsibility
of these billion-dollar teams to ensure universal equity? Affordable healthcare,
hunger, access opportunities, not just cash for a powerful view. 100% agree, very much in line
with these other questions. I think that these start
to change the power dynamic of those who own the resources and those who provide the value. How do you see people in the
beginning of their careers being creative generalists? How do they gain repertoire
and critical judgment? That's really great,
'cause usually the way is you do the work. You spend the time doing the reps to get familiar with what it
takes to be good at something. What is interesting
about AI is it allows you to do things at a pace and volume like we've never seen before. We have a saying internally
that from volume comes virtue. And what we mean by that is,
just like in anything else, if you do the reps, you get good at it. But with AI, the number of reps you can do in a short period of time is
orders of magnitude larger. The function is different. I might not be the one doing the strokes with a brush or the pencil, but I can get hundreds,
thousands, millions of reps in to make this viable and get good at it. That doesn't mean we
aren't losing an art form of some sort by doing that. That is going to be a part of the change and we start to lose some of those things that we held dear in the way
that we did them in the past. So there will be a negotiation about what is held invaluable. How do you get existing
workforce, including management, to adopt mental models required to work in the manner described
in your presentation? Great question. Work is already starting to
move in this general direction when it comes to the idea
of skills-based hiring and project-based work rather
than jobs and job holders. We saw a lot of that during the pandemic and it's probably the hottest trend in HR conferences right now. And yes, I am the nerdy dude
who watches those on YouTube 'cause it informs stuff like this. But how do we get them to think about it? Ultimately, the best way is to have, like show them the tangible
value they would get by leveraging AI amongst
a team in surprising ways. So as an employee, can
I show them something that I would do outside
of my normal job function using AI now powered by that? Now the next thing you
do is you don't just say, hey, cool, I'm gonna do that for free. You don't have to pay me anymore. You say, hey, how can this
be recognized and rewarded? I want to create net new
value for the organization, but I also wanna make sure that I capture some of the upside of that value. Do you think everything
could just start looking the same within
organizations with the limit, the unique culture a company
has to attract talent? It does already. There are so many organizations that just kind of look the same 'cause they're all
following the same playbook. AI doesn't change that. It makes it possible
to do things at a scale and a frequency that's
impossible otherwise, but that is 100% up to us as
to whether it looks the same or whether it does not. That's one of the beautiful things. AI doesn't take away
our agency in that way, and that will always be a
uniquely human struggle. How is IP evolving and going
to evolve in this scenario? What are the new business
models to AI and human collabs? Palo Brasil, all right. IP in this, wow. IP is a really tricky thing to navigate, and I actually realized I'm out of time. So what I'm going to do is
I'm gonna take these elements from Slido and I'm going to
respond to them on Twitter. So if you have more of these questions, follow me on Twitter, and then you'll be able to
see those answers there. And with that, thank you so much for spending your time with me today. Cheers.
(crowd applauds) (gentle music)