Eoghan McCabe:
We were always excited about the power of content.   It was how we got our message out into the world. 
We felt that if we generously gave what we were   learning and thinking, good things will come back. 
We started with our blog. We wrote books, held   events, and we got older and quieter as companies 
tend to do. This is our effort at a comeback to... the original Intercom content energy, and this is 
our latest iteration for 2024. We're calling it   Off Script. It's a series of recordings that will 
be open conversational presentations that we hope   you'll find both useful and interesting. I don't 
want to spoil the whole series, but we will be   talking a lot about the future of customer service 
and the impact that AI is destined to have on it. In this very first episode of Off Script, Des 
will talk about the generative AI revolution   that startups and all of technology, and very, 
very soon all of society at large will certainly   be going through. He'll tell the story of 
our reaction to this moment, how we launched   our first generative AI features within just two 
months of OpenAI's first ChatGPT release, and then   launched Fin, our AI customer service agent, just 
a few weeks after that. But most usefully to you, He'll talk about how to make the most of this 
opportunity. He'll give you frameworks and   ideas for thinking through the ways in which 
you need to reinvent yourselves in this post   -AI world. This is classic Des Traynor energy, 
and I hope you'll enjoy it as much as I did. Steve Jobs: Do you know who Alexander the Great's   tutor was for about 14 years? Aristotle. 
Through the miracle of the printed page. I can at least read what Aristotle wrote 
without an intermediary. But I can't ask   Aristotle a question. My hope is that in our 
lifetimes, we can make a tool of a new kind,   of an interactive kind, getting more refined 
year after year after year. And in our lifetimes,   it should get very refined. And so my hope 
is someday we can capture the underlying   worldview of Aristotle. And someday, 
some student will be able to not only   read the words Aristotle wrote, but ask 
Aristotle a question and get an answer. Des Traynor: I found that clip on Twitter and 
the thing that really stuck with me was like,   generally speaking, this is a guy who sees 
the future. And he made that kind of like   crazy distant proclamation that honestly I'd 
never heard before. But when I look at it now,   I realized like he really did properly see the 
future and granted it wasn't unfortunately in   his lifetime, but we're very really able 
to ask Aristotle questions now. And that's   just a reminder of the sort of leaps that 
we've seen over the past couple of years. Steve Jobs: Every once in a while, a revolutionary 
product comes along. Des Traynor: Any single   second of the Steve Jobs introduction of the 
iPhone is just devastatingly amazing. From like,   time he opens the map and you see all the 
pins drop for the coffee shop to when he   just transitions into a phone call. It was just an 
end to end, you're looking at the future. Forget   what you know about technology. And I think 
to anyone who works in tech, those moments are   rare. I probably have had, for myself, I think the 
first time I played with a Commodore Amiga, Web 2. iPhone. And then honestly, AI, but I really, a lot 
of us in Intercom think this AI is bigger than all   of them, possibly all of them put together. AI 
is like, it's beyond comprehension a lot of time. The jobs that people do or want to get done are 
often quite timeless. To give you an example,   like, if I want to send you a package, 
I'll probably use FedEx or DHL. Julius   Caesar would have used horseback. But the job 
is still the same. Get this thing from here to   there. The photo shows, on one side is a commuter 
vehicle in like early 1900s, maybe. There's a lot   of people reading newspapers. They're doing 
that because they're bored on a long commute. Today's version of that is if you get 
on a train or a bus and look around,   try to see any single person's face, you won't. 
What you'll see is the top of their head because   their face is angled down and they're face 
deep in a phone. The job of being bored on   public transport and trying to entertain yourself 
hasn't actually changed. It's just the technology   has changed. And the reason I make that point a 
lot is because sometimes people, they can be... technologists who love today's technology 
and they fall in love with their favorite   piece of technology. And this could be 
like a framework or a piece of hardware   or something like that. But you can't fall 
in love with the solution to a problem. You   have to fall in love with the problem to be 
able to survive these technological leaps,   these super cycles like AI. You have to be 
in love with the problem you're trying to   solve because the technology will come and 
go. There'll be a better way always to do   these things and it'll come along every 10, 20, 
30 years. There'll be a whole new way to do it. and you don't want to be one of those 
people clinging onto your fax machine.   So in the case of AI, what I would say is 
understand at its core what is the job your   product actually does for people. It could 
be that you just connect people with other   people. It could be that you account for 
every employee. It could be that you help   people talk to each other. But you have to 
just understand that job at its actual core,   independent of any technological solution. And 
then with that core understanding, ask yourself, How can AI make this quicker, easier, better, 
faster, or more accessible to more people in   more situations? I make that point a lot 
to try and encourage people in order to   build in the new world that you have to only 
bring forward the problem you're trying to   solve and don't bring any of the baggage that 
your previous solutions might have carried. If you compare AI with the best of what humans 
can do, the humans will usually be better in a   lot of cases. Slower, more expensive, but 
better. So AI is probably not going to get   you a design as good as a great designer. 
The first thing you have to realize is most   humans aren't great designers. So you have to 
understand it's the average that we're comparing,   we're not always the best. And that's the 
first point where people will get tripped up   in thinking how this will affect their business, 
is that like the average person can't do design. So if you build a piece of AI that can help them 
do design, that's a massive step forward. And the   ability of a world -class designer is actually not 
relevant in that formula, right? The second thing   I think you have to just think about is just 
the economics of all this. There are a lot of   products where fast beats amazing. So even we even 
see versions of this in customer support. Like   if I ask a question like, hey, how do I reset my 
password? I actually don't want the artisanal hand crafted answer, which is like, "Good 
evening, Mr. Traynor. Thank you so much   for your detailed query regarding password 
reset." I will sacrifice a little bit of   quality for a zero second response. The 30th 
of November, 2022, I first saw something on   Twitter, then I saw a few pings in a Slack 
channel. And it was one of those, you know,   I think we'd all been through a bit of like, you 
know, a bit of crypto hype, bit of Web3 hype. So you're kind of like, oh, I'm sure 
this is the thing, but whatever,   I'll get back to it. Then my phone kept going. 
I got a message from our head of AI at the time,   Fergal, just put a link saying, have you seen 
this? And I was like, yeah, everyone seems to   be talking about it. I wonder what it is. And 
then I think I got a text from Ciaran, Intercom's   Co-founder and original CTO. He was like, I've 
been playing with this thing. It's pretty cool. And then I looked at Slack again and it was a long 
message from Fergal which was like, this is a huge   leap in capabilities. And then Fergal posted a 
tweet as well at the same time saying like, sound   the alarm bells, this is a huge step forward. I 
think the thing that was most immediately obvious   with state ChatGPT when it launched was it was 
really good at conversation and really good at   like sort of basic problem solving. And a 
lot of our world in customer service is... conversations about basically solving basic 
problems. And this thing could do it pretty   well. And for sure, it lacked all the nuance 
of like a per specific instance, like it didn't   understand our refund policy or whatever. But 
very obviously, like if you ask yourself, what are   large language models good at? Well, conversation, 
basic reasoning, like fact finding, basic problem   solving. And then on top of that, they work 24 -7 
and they can speak lots of different languages. It means it was obviously going to have some 
impact on support. And I think that impact was   going to be somewhere on the scale of medium 
to large. We have always wanted to be at the   forefront of having the best technology 
available for customer service. This was   clearly new technology. There was going to 
be a race to adopt it to change the game   of customer service. We talked about it 
at length, me and Fergal, me and Eoghan,   Paul, our Head of Product, et cetera. 
There was lots of discussion there. I don't think any of us could see a world where 
this wasn't going to be one of the biggest   changes in the customer service landscape 
ever. So I think on Monday we were like,   let's go. So Fergal's team canceled their 
plans and they got busy building what was   our first release, we called it Inbox 
AI. It was a series of augmentations and   improvements to the Inbox. We released that 
really, really damn quickly. Like I think   it was like seven weeks end to end, possibly 
faster. I don't want to do them a disservice. But it really just felt like a proud moment 
for the company to have caught a wave and   caught it so well and moved so quickly. A 
lot of which hinges on Fergal's attention,   Eoghan's decision making. When people talk 
about startups moving fast, it's actually   executive decision making is the first thing that 
you should look to. And that was what we had that   I think a lot of folks wouldn't naturally have. 
So we hit that release and it was really popular. And then we immediately got to work. Now, this is 
before GPT4 had been released, but we were already   working behind the scenes, Fergal's team, on, 
well, could this thing actually do proper customer   support? And I think that work had started in 
January. It was already blowing our minds by   like February. I had seen examples of it, like 
Fergal had done a little workshop with us in the   design studio. And by July, when it went live to 
everyone, it was blowing everyone's minds. And now   today, it's done - gosh, like five million answers 
or something like this. It's a total resolution   area of 40% for people. And it's only going up 
like this. As a product, it's been incredible   to witness. And it's a great example to me of 
what AI can do if you move quick enough on it. Generally speaking, when something like this 
happens, it's like an extinction moment. It's   like a meteorite hits your industry. And some 
will survive, but not all. And the framing that   is often used when people talk about survival is 
the species, not the strongest, not the biggest,   not the one with the largest bank balance, 
but simply the one who's quickest to adapt   and react. I think that's the first thing 
it means for companies. Understand that AI   is happening. There's a good chance whole chunks 
of your product, your business, you're offering, have to change, some pieces just won't be 
relevant anymore at all. And because of that,   you need to start thinking about for your 
entire tech stack, for your entire product,   every workflow, every task, you 
have to start asking yourself,   does AI change how this would get done? 
So if you are a word processor or an issue   tracker or a project management tool, you 
start asking yourself things like, well, At this point, the user would normally 
write a summary of the project to date.   Do they? When AI could do that in like point 
zero two seconds or whatever? Probably not.   That whole feature? No longer necessary. Or 
at this point, the user would identify if   this receipt is valid. Really? Because 
AI is pretty good at like, you know,   this idea of like, it's very multimodal, it can 
scan images, it can scan PDFs, it can listen,   it can watch videos, etc. It can parse things 
really, really well. So there are very few... industries that I think will survive 
without having to change a line of   code per se. If you're really sure that 
the machine has genuinely a machine,   meaning the AI, large language model, if 
you're really sure it has nothing to add,   fine. But I'd nearly say bookmark that because, 
you know, give it six weeks and something new   will happen. To orient yourself properly, 
you have to sort of start with like what's   actually possible now that wasn't possible 
before. And I think AI is really good at reading, understanding, summarizing, generating 
images. And like all of this is just going to   get better and better and faster and bigger 
and more powerful and all that sort of stuff.   So you then have to sort of say, well, what's 
the bit that we think is the magic that like   humans are inherently involved in? There 
will be something most often, you know,   a lot of this, I really believe our vision for 
the future of customer service, for example,   is like, is humans and AI, but they'll like, 
you know, the roles have changed substantially. I'd encourage you to observe a sort of 
hierarchy of how far we can go with AI   and don't be shy about your ambition in 
a sense. The first basic level is what I   would call the task level. Take an atomic 
little step and use AI to do it properly.   So say analyzing the sentiment of a message. 
It's a pretty discrete step. It's also low   downside. It doesn't really break things 
if we get it slightly wrong. But as you get further up the hierarchy what you'll see is 
there's like say sequences or like you know   a chain of events which might be like 
detect the sentiment and if it's angry   move it to the angry pile and prioritise 
it and ping a Slack channel to make sure   that somebody knows right so you're 
you're joining the dots a bit right. A step up again above that would be what I call 
workflow level AI. You're looking at someone's   actual full workflow and saying, how can we do 
this? And Fin is a good example of this. The job   is message comes in, understand the message, 
find the answer, look up the knowledge base,   look at previous conversations, jump back 
in, use all of that to construct an answer,   send the answer, see what the customer has to say. 
If the customer's happy, close the conversation.   If they're not, keep going. But you're 
automating an entire chunk of workflow.   But you can go further. You can do exception 
handling too. You can say things like, hey, not only do we do workflows, on the previous 
level you might have spat out exceptions,   been like, don't know what to 
do. You can go further and say,   let's start to work through these exceptions and 
make sure that we have defenses against them as   well. And all of a sudden then you don't even 
need to defer to human. You can start dealing   with your own exceptions. But then you can go 
all the way up to outcome level. It's probably   the highest ambition here. And outcome 
level AI would be like, you simply say, I want great support or I want brilliant 
marketing and you just click the kind of   like big stupid go button and see what 
happens. I think I worry a lot of folks   stop their explorations quite low down and 
I think you're better off assuming that   you're going to have to get to the top and 
work out where do you think you can start. So I think the most common criticism or the 
thing that people latch onto a lot is like,   can it really think? And you've heard all sorts 
of frankly ill-informed, it's just a bad photocopy   of the internet, or it's just glorified text 
completion or whatever. That's the most common,   you know, fud you might hear about AI. Fergal, our 
VP of AI, he like, I think he thoroughly debunked   this in a post he wrote where he said, like, 
here's a scenario I've given to ChatGPT and... It's a pretty weird scenario and the 
reason it's pretty weird is because it   needs to be obvious to everyone that this 
story never existed before. So there's no   simple autocomplete that could happen. 
And the story was something like I put   a load of apples into a bucket with a load of 
super glue and I put it on top of a door and I   called my brother into the room. My brother 
came in running in alarmed. What happened   next? And basically without really much 
of a flaw GPT nails the answer perfectly. And then just to push the boat further and 
further, you can ask follow -on questions, which   he did. One of which was, we tried the exact same 
thing the following day with my older brother, and   it didn't work. Why might this be? And it's like, 
well, could be a load of different reasons. But   like number one is probably the glue had dried. 
But number two, which I thought was brilliant,   was like, maybe the other brother had already 
informed one of your brothers that informed your   brother, which is also a plausible situation. 
And then like, I think the third one was like, And what if we went to the moon with this bucket 
and tried to play the trick there? And it's like,   oh, well, you're into the problems 
with gravity or whatever. And like,   it's pretty hard to say that that's not like 
reasoning, that it's not like, you know, creating   a sort of worldview and answering questions 
on it. So I think, I think people have to,   you know, whatever fud they want to share about 
AI and what it can't do or how it can't think,   they have to acknowledge that story in their, 
in their criticism and understand like, come up with a better angle of attack 
that says it can't do basic thinking,   because it looks like it can. I remember using, I think it was rewind.ai, 
which is just like effectively desktop memory   augmentation tool, it's really cool. But 
I was trying to get it to turn off a pop   -up that comes up every time you join a 
new Google Meet. It would ask you, hey,   do you want to record this or something like 
that? And I went to like their help center,   couldn't get the answer anywhere. And I 
asked Fin, like, you know, I said, hey,   I'm trying to disable this thing. It gave me 
a perfect answer. And then it said to me where   I read the answer. And I clicked through to 
sort of see what the help center article was. And it actually didn't include the answer. 
It's just, Fin just reasoned about the fact   that if this is a setting about all of you 
doing various different types of recording,   it's probably gonna be in there, you know? Which 
is actually, like, it's actually probably how   a human would think about it, in that, like, 
look, what Fin was basically saying to me was,   I'm pretty sure if you can do that, it's in 
this big bucket of settings that I've found   about over here. And so it gives you, like, a 
pretty good answer. And it turns out that was,   like, spot on. But again, like, that's, 
you know, I dare say, like, a support. person would have done roughly the same, 
unless they happen to know for a fact,   in which case they would have given me a firm 
declarative answer. But oftentimes they're also   going to say, I don't know, it's probably a 
notification setting. You know, that's again,   it's not quite like sticky apple bucket level 
thinking, but like, it's the sort of thinking   that you want to see in an agent to really make 
sure that it can, it can like solve a lot of these   common problems, because you won't get like a lot 
of the... chatbots have gone through like eras. I think it was Eoghan made this point recently, 
he's like, the era one of chatbots was the old IVR   phone tree, like, you know, if you want sales, 
press the first button, if you want support,   press the second button. And that was like the 
gen one of chatbots. And we all thought that   was amazing, but this was like the early 2000s 
or like 2005, six, seven. And it really wasn't,   it was a shit experience. And it was also a 
nightmare to set up and program. So it just wasn't   really great at all. The gen two was like, we had 
a product in the space called ResolutionBot and... Gen 2 was using a little bit of like fuzzy 
AI. So it was like type your thing and we're   going to try and roughly work out some 
keywords. And like, so if you say, hey,   I'd like to upgrade your enterprise platinum 
premium sales plan, it would be like, hmm,   that sounds like a sales query. Let's kick 
off the sales default response. So it's a   lot of if this then that, but the if this 
was powered by a sniff of AI. The biggest   tax with those types of products is you 
had to do a load of setup work, right? And it didn't work in specific instances unless 
you did all the work of setting up every single   answer. This is where you need the generative 
AI. That's the gen tree. This is what Fin is.   It's a generative AI powered by large language 
models. It is an AI agent that does all this.   But what makes it so powerful is the way you turn 
Fin on is not by setting up a load of if this,   then that rules. It's not by teaching 
the dictionary of certain trigger words,   anything like that at all. 
You click the On button. and Fin will consume all the content you give it,   read all the conversations you've had before, 
and it'll create a sort of an understanding,   and it'll answer questions from that 
understanding, and it'll do it pretty damn well. I think the thing a lot of people don't get is 
how much more satisfactory it is for a user to   get an instant reply to anything. If I 
said to you, hey, ask me the question,   you want to get solved. You're like, oh, 
I'm checking in tomorrow and I'm wondering,   can I get an early check in on a late flight and 
I wonder blah, blah, blah, blah. If I said to you,   hey, there's two options here, you can get 
an answer to your question immediately. Or   if you wait just 14 minutes, I will get you a 
human to write you an answer to that question. A lot of people for a lot of questions will 
say, I'll take immediately please. And also   if I said to you, hey, the immediate answer 
is going to be based on all the available   information that is there to consume. 
So, and it'll be based on all the recent   answers that the team have given of late to 
questions like this. So what we're going to   see a lot of is that Fin will deliver the 
best available answer immediately. And... that will, in a large number of cases, be 
the best outcome for your customer too. There are all sorts of tools that are like maybe 
power user tools if you're to be complimentary   or maybe just damn hard to use tools if 
we're to be honest. And so I'll give you   like two different examples. I would argue 
like Microsoft Excel is a brilliant product   for people who know Microsoft Excel and it's 
nowhere near as powerful for us. Let's just   say enterprise SaaS software I'll pick 
on one like say Workday that is just very powerful but also complex software that's hard to 
use. In both cases, I think the ability to just   speak to effectively an agent or an AI chatbot 
and say the thing you're trying to do can really   open the doors to all sorts of people or all 
sorts of streamlined workflows. So in Workday,   it's entirely possible that in a future 
release, I'll just click on the little   bot person's face and say, please book 
October 14th off return. And it'll say, done. And that's it. And that's all I really 
wanted to do. I wasn't interested in exploring   their beautiful taxonomy or navigation. I don't 
care about any of that. I just need to book the   day off. But you've now blown open the total 
available market for these products. So that's   a huge technological change that we're going to 
see play out over and over again, specifically   in power user tools, because it'll blow up the 
addressable market. But also, I think in larger,   more complicated beasts, let's say software like 
Salesforce or Workday or things like that, Coupa. you're going to see like most of this 
software is not designed for the end user,   it's designed for the admin or the backend or 
the bookkeeper or whoever. But there's a lot   of people who have to log in and deal with this 
clunky UI. And if we could expose to them a very   simple streamlined chatbot interface where 
they can just say the thing that they want,   that's going to be like revolutionary in 
terms of like making it a far more like a   stomachable product for a lot of its like, 
you know, daily active users. So I think   like the idea of being good at spreadsheets, 
hopefully, will become not a thing because... actually the spreadsheets are good 
at you. And that's the difference. The most extreme version of this is like adapt 
or die. Probably more radio -friendly version   is that we should consider it a time of massive 
opportunity when the single greatest technologist,   Steve Jobs, spoke with this being like one day 
possible, hopefully in our lifetime. Granted,   we missed his lifetime, but this is 
that day. The one day he spoke about,   this is day one. And I think if you don't... see the insane opportunity. If you don't see 
the urgency on you, the imperative for you   to reconsider how your product, how your 
business works based on what has changed   in technology over the past couple of years, 
you're missing out. And I think there's a real   danger you'll find yourself running around, 
shouting at the clouds, perfectly prepared   for a world that we've all moved on from. 
And I just encourage people to get going. We need to rebuild our industries, our companies,   our societies around this 
new world and it's day one.