  Andrew  Ross  Sorkin  and his  guests  the founder and CEO  of  Nvidia. Jensen  Wang.  Wang  Wang. Welcome back.  Everybody.  Jensen  is  here.  Of  course  the CEO of   Nvidia as I mentioned at the   top of  the day.  This   is the  clear winner   of every winter.  In  the  world in  of  In  artificial   intelligence  thus far   his company Powers   everything  from  open  a.i.   Google's  programs  matter   what  Earl Frenemies  in   some  ways. We'll talk  about  it. He  founded the company  back  in  1993  over   breakfast at  Denny's with   two friends since then  as   CEO.  He's  LED Nvidia  to   become  the world's most   valuable  Semiconductor  Company and Via stock  has been  on  a tear  up  two  hundred and forty percent this year  reaching  dollar. 240  Market  cap and we are  so   grateful  to have you here   today market  as  we  all try  to  make  sense of  what   is happening  in  the world  of  AI  and I think it's   so many ways  you saw this   first and so  I'm hoping  to   start with  this  and I said   you power what  open a.i. And  chat GPT  has been  we've all  been reading  about open   a.i.  And all of  the  travails  inside  that  that   company and nonprofit and  we maybe talk about some of  the governance  issues  there  as  well. But you delivered I  think this  is  this  is   back. I don't know  what   year  we're talking about  now,  but you delivered  the first box the first chips  to  Elon  Musk  who was  one of  the founders  of   open  AI  only a  couple of  years ago.  What  did you  what  happened? Well, I  delivered to him  the first  AI  supercomputer the world  ever  made. It  took  us   five years  to  make  it   is called a dgx.  It's   everywhere  in the world   today people  think that  we   build gpus  but this  GPU is   is  70  pounds  35 thousand  Parts out of  the 35   thousand eight  of those   chips come  from  tsmc. It   is  so  heavy in new  robots   to  build it. It's  like   an electric car.  It   consumes  10,000  amps  it   It  we  sell  it  for  two hundred fifty thousand   dollars it  it's  a  super computer. So  it  takes  another  super computer to test. This   is  a computer  first of its   kind  and we  started working  on  it  in  2012  took me  five  years to  build it   at first  I built it  for our  own engineers and I spoke  about it  at  one of  our  conferences and Elon  saw it.  He  goes. I want  one of   those and and he  said  he   And and told  me  about  open a  And i I'd also   knew Peter  Beal  who was a  Berkeley  Professor.  He  was  one of the  early people  at   opening II  and  Ilya sutskever. He  I met him  during  the Alex  net days   five  years earlier.   He's involved in  all the  drama that  we've been   reading about.  And so   anyways,  I delivered the  world's first AI   supercomputer to  open  a  eye on that day and and  people  took  pictures  of   it  and so  on  the  internet somewhere. Yeah. Um   when you  did that  and you  said  you didn't  do  it   originally  for him.  What   was it  though  that  you saw  at that point five  years  before  you even  delivered  it  in  2012  when  this   Hall  first started first  happened  Alex  net did  something remarkable. Here's   a here's  a neural  network.   It's  a it's a it's a  software  program where the  way you programmed it was  to show it  the results that   you wanted. Which is  the  backwards which of  most   Which programs  up  to  then,  you know  programs  up  to   them  were  where Engineers  would sit down  and you would  write software  and then  you  would test  it  to see  if   it  produced  the outputs you  wanted  but here  you showed   it  examples  and you you  you taught it what   outputs you wanted  what   helped us to  expect  and so   when  we  first saw the  results of  it  Alex  net the  results were  so  spectacular  that  Alex  kraszewski  and  and Ilya sutskever  and of   course  Geoffrey Hinton they   achieved  results that   Results of  computer  results  vision  Results recognition  that  that  no  no  computer   vision  expert  where it was   able to achieve before  that.  And so  so  the first the  first observation was is how   remarkable  was but then   then  we  were  we  were   fortunate have  taken a step   back  and ask ourselves.   What  is the  implication of   this  to the  future  of   computers?  And and we  drew   the right conclusions that   that  this  was going to   change  the way Computing was  going to be done.  This was going to change.  Change the  way software  was  going to  be  written.  And  this  was going to  change   the type of applications. We   could write write.  Did you  get to  work? Was there any  part of you did you write  that was  scared  when  all  this  happened  you just   mentioned to name's George   Hamilton  Hinton  as well.   You also  mentioned Elia  and  and those are names by   the way,  if  you've  been   following If  the way.   what's happening, if   the way,  If  the way.  they   have  been  very  outspoken  about the dangers of  AI   very, well. I want to get  into  actually  what you   think happened  at open  a.i. In the past  couple   weeks,  but it  may very   well  be  that  there  may have been a new Step   change  in  terms of  terms  in  change  Step  been a new   there may have  that  be   well  very   of what this technology.   LG was  but was there  ever a part of you   when you're seeing  this all   happen  say oh my goodness.  I don't know. We're on the   cusp of a revolution   in a great way. But this  is   dangerous.  What  I  would say,  I would say 12   years.  Nobody  expected  the  results where we get  and I  think anybody who would have   would have  said  so  back   then  would have   over-exaggerated, you know,  our understanding of  the  of the  the rate  of   progress. There's no   question that the rate of  progress  is  high. And what   we  what we and realized   today,  is  that  that  of   course  And of  and course   course, what  we  can do   today with  with  these  models  and intelligence  are  related,  but not the same,  you know, we're very  good   at  perception  today and  we're very  good  at  those  One-Shot knee-jerk  reaction.  I recognize that  that's   a dog.  I can I can finish   that  sentence  but there's a  whole bunch of  things   that we can't do  yet.  do   can't we  things that of   bunch whole a there's but  sentence  that  We  can't  reason  yet,  you know   this multi-step.   Meaning that  humans  are  very  good  at  a I can't do   and how far away  do you   think we  are from that?   Well, we'll see.  We'll see  I think that  just about   everybody's working on  it   and and all the  researchers are working on   it. Everybody's working on   it. We're trying  to figure  out you know, how do  you  take  a goal  break it  down   into  a whole bunch of  steps  and created the sijin tree   and then  walk down the  decision  tree  to  figure   out you know, which one of   the paths leads to  the most   optimal answer. This  is   this  is  a how we  reason   through things  how we   iterate through Problem  today,  as  you know,  what you're making  bets now   in terms  of   of technology that  you have   to  build an  investment.  You have  to  make  yeah  on   where we're going to  be   five years  from now   ten years ten years ago,   right?  So, you know  people   talk  about a GI. Yeah, right  right artificial  AGI. Yeah,   artificial  general  intelligence. Yeah. Do you   think in 10 years from now?  We are  there.  Bye depending  on  how you define  it. I  think the answer is yes.  And  so  the question is what is a  gi8 if  we  defined a GI  as   a piece of  software  a  computer  that  can take  a  whole bunch of  tests and  these tests reflect tests,   basic intelligence  tests and  and by  achieving by  by by  completing  those tests those  completing  by  achieving by   and intelligence  basic  deliver results that  are  fairly  fairly   competitive to a  Normal   human,  I would I would say  that  within  the next  five   years.  You're going to see a  obviously a eyes  that  can  that  can achieve those tests  and designed  the chips that   you're making right now.   Yeah. Well, you need  to   have  the same  staff that   designs them. In  fact,  none of our chips are  possible  today without a i  Literally,  the H1 hundreds  were shipping today was  designed  with  the  assistance of a whole lot of   a eyes. Otherwise,  we   wouldn't be able  to  cram so  many  transistors on  a chip   or  optimize  the algorithms   to  the level that we have   and you know  software  can't  be  written without a i chips  can be  designed  without a i  nothing can  yeah, nothing's possible. We   started by  talking about  open  a.i. And  everybody's  Ai and   yeah. Nothing's possible.  focused on  that.  What did you make?  What   happened? The ousting of  Sam  Altman  alternative Sam  Altman  the all of  it. Yeah.  Well, first of  all,  I'm  happy that  they're settled  and I hope  they're settled  is a  really  great team  and  and they're doing important  work  and they've achieved   great results and I'm just   really  happy that  they're  settled,  you know, also   it also bring in  brings  to   mind  the importance of  corporate governance. There's  a invidious here 30 years  after our founding  we've  gone  through a lot of   adversity if we didn't   set up  our company properly,  who knows what   would have been who knows  what  would have  done  and  so  I think when   you're when you're   architecting  an  industry,  you know, you want  to  apply  some of that  some  that  of   that some of  some  apply  you want to industry  wisdom   to  architecting  a company  Yeah, and and so  I'm really   proud of  him videos   corporate governance   by the way  in  and if  not  for the architecture  that   we  establish and I was 29   years old and you'd be  kind   of  your  a  for-profit company  though.  What's  so  interesting  I think about this  sort  of   dynamic is  that  that  is  a  firm  that  is  effectively  operated  from  a governance   perspective as   a not-for-profit  and  one of the  reasons that   they  set it up that way  was  because they  did think it   was dangerous Elon  Musk said  it  was dangerous at the   beginning Celia said, it was   dangerous.  And so   the question is in  the  sort of multitude of  these  different businesses  that   are in  a I do  you think you  do  need  these  not-for-profits?  Do you   think that  that  the  incentive system  is  just   fundamentally off.  And  should be a for-profit.  I mean a lot  of people  now think the  capitalist have taken over.  Well  Regulators  are not  for profit  and we  should   regulate  these first of  all  just  take  a step back and  think about what  a i  is AI is an autonomous   system. It's  an  autonomous   system. That's more  sophistication  autonomous   information system. We  have   a lot of  autonomous  systems  today self-driving  cars  in   some  in  factories  within factories  already  exists  robots  are  autonomous  in factories   with  planes  are autonomous.  Autopilot self  Landing all  of those  capabilities   exist.  We   we ought to make sure that   we  applied the first  principles  of  autonomous   systems in  the same  way.   We  have to design  a  properly  tested  properly   stress test the properly   monitor it  there's Inside   Out safety. There's outside  in  safety  the FAA flight   Air Traffic Control  redundancy  Traffic Control  Air flight  FAA the safety   in  outside redundancy   diversity.  There's a whole  bunch of  different systems  that  we have to put  in.  Place for autonomous  systems  there's a place for Place for  lot of  place for Industries   to  learn from  at the   beginning of   those I mentioned there's  sort of a frenemy situation  going on  with a  lot of   companies that  use your   chips.  They're desperate for  your  chips.  They  they   want  your  gpus  and  at the same time. They're  also  trying  to  build  their own frankly.  I'm  curious that  you've  seen   it  all how you would stack  rank  the success of  the  various companies that  are  in  this  AI  space.  We have  somebody  from  Google   deepmind's  here  today  their CEO.  Well, I'm  curious where you think open   a.i. Ranks  in that  there's inflection. Amazon   is  trying  to  play   and I'm not going to  rank   my  friends,  you know,  but you but you have a  sense  of  and I part  of the   question  that I want to  but  I'm not going to  do  it.  I'm just  kidding,  kidding  but there is  a question   about harshly whether all of   these things  converge,  uh-huh  meeting know that  that  they  all it  just   this all  become some kind   of  commoditized  no   business. No, I don't think  so. I don't think so. I think  what's  going to  happen   is we're going to have  We're  going to  we're have   off-the-shelf a eyes  and  these off-the-shelf apis  are  going to  be  really  really   good  at  solving a lot of   problems. But but you're   going to  have  companies  in healthcare going to  have   supervised, you know, super  tuned a eyes  that  take   these off the shelf a eyes   and make  them  super good   at  drug  Discovery or  super  good  at  chip  design   and we just use our company.   For example,  the vast   majority  of  our company's  value company's our of   majority  vast  the example,   For company.  our is in the  data  and the intelligence   and the know  know how   to craft  Know how  that's   inside  our company and  know how  none of that  data   Know how  is out  on the   internet. You can't get an   AI to go  learn it. And so   I've  got to take a really   smart AI  which is  what  we   do. We  build a smart Ai  and  then  we  teach it  how  to design chips.  We  teach  you how to  write software   you teach it  how to  do   drug  Discovery.  You'll   teach it  how to  do   you know  Radiology.  Let me   ask you a geopolitical   question. We're  gonna hear from the president  Taiwan  just  after this  and  there is  a big debate  as   you know, about chip   Independence  the big  investment  that we're making  in, To   Manufactured here in the   United States Two whether we   should  be  exporting certain  types of  chips to  China.   Where are we  on the  Journey  of  being chip  independent  if  you will  and do you   think that  that  is a   worthy goal?  We  are we  are  somewhere between a decade   we  We  two decades away   from  we  from  supply  chain  Independence  Independence.  As  I mentioned earlier.  Our  systems comes 35,000  parts  and eight of them come  from   tsmc  and the supply  chain  when  you think through  are in Taiwan course,  there are a lot of  in   Taiwan  there all over the   world but supply  chain  Independence  is  going to be  really  challenging.  Yeah,  we  should  try it. We   should  Endeavour it. I mean   we  should  absolutely  go   down  the Journey of it,  but  total independence  But  of it.  but of it,  of  But  of it.  supply  chain is  not  a real  practical thing for  for a decade  or   took a one of the other  things  that's  happening  as you  know, so  well  is   that the  u.s.  Government   has effectively told  you you  need  to  throttle  the speed  of  the chips that you  are  exporting to  China.  Yeah.  This is having impact.  On   the business  itself, but I'm  curious how you think about  that  also  geopolitically   as  a business  the  National Security concerns   Jamie dimon.  We were talking  earlier about you know, what   companies you should do  business  with  should   you do  business  with   people  in  China or  not,   given all of  the concerns   that  people  have  well   on first  principles  were   a company that  was built for  business. And so  we  try to   do  business  with  everybody  we  can on the other  hand   on the other  hand  our  national  security  matters  and our national   competitiveness  competitiveness.  Matters  somewhere between matters  Matters between matters the  the between that makes  sense  and so  And sense.  our and  sense And sense.  country,   of  course  once  our  Industries  to  to  on  the  one hand  be  successful   right lead  the world invent   amazing technology  have   technology  in dependence on   the one hand  and and be  the  leader  of  the world in   technology  on  the one hand   on the other  hand. We need  to  make  sure  that  we   ensure  our national   security our  regulations  provide for that  the most   critical  that  technology   critical  most  that the  for  regulations provide our Build  the Leading Edge of it   is not made available to   China.  And so  what   we have to  do  a new  regulation just came  out one  that  came  out a year ago   one just  came  out this   year. And so  we  have  to   we have to  come  up  with   new chips that  comply  with   the regulation. And once  we   comply  with the  regulation   will  go  back to Market  and  and do  the best. Do you   think a regulation is a  good idea because I have  I  have  heard you say that  you  think potentially by   throttling  these chips.  We   are just  hiring and creating  competitors in  places like  China that  you can't  control.  That's  what  you  don't look they're always  unintended  consequences   everything  that  we do in   complicated systems.  If we  want to want  to  limit them   from  access  to  technology   like  nvidia's  maybe it   doesn't really  they  find a   way to  get it  or they find   a way to  inspire their local  industry. There's some  50   companies are being built in   China that  that  are going  to  go  provide this   technology. So  we  you know,  know, it's  you we  So   technology. this  provide go   going to  are it's   it's a it's a complicated  thing.  And so  what  can you  do? Well, you could you  can make  your own  choices,   but the the other  thing that's  happened   literally in the  past   couple  months  now is   Huawei  came  out with  a new  phone.  Yeah, and it   surprised everybody in  terms  of  the chips in  that  phone  in terms  of  being a  7 nanometre chip. There was a  view  that  China was never  going to get there. We were  we  had this  sort  of  real   Real  opportunity ahead of   them  by  many  years.   Were you  surprised by  that?  The the The rumors of it   and in  the market  has been   around  for a long  time. And  so  was it  where we   surprised?  I don't think so.  I don't think anybody in   the industry  was really   surprised.  And and is  it   possible  to  take   something that  that  said   16  nanometer and Shrink  at   the seven?  You know, these  are just  numbers.  Is  it   really  7 did they  shrink   it  down  to  something that   was sufficiently  good   that you  can make  a phone  from? Yeah, I think so. And  and so  so  I think it   you know, there's no  magic  in  these numbers as   you know, it's just seven the  number  but the question is  what is our lead  over  them.  Do you  think in   semiconductors? Yeah  in   semiconductors, you know   call  it  call  it  a decade,  you know, you could decide   yeah  and call it a decade,  but I could you take  the  decade  old technology  and  just  squeeze The Living   Daylights out of  it  until  it  produces  something  that's  kind of like   something from  five  years  ago.  Yeah, probably  and so   so  I think there's a lot of   in  a lot of  a lot of   clever  Engineers all  over the  world and  they're trying to you know,  get the most  out of   me ask you a different   company that they have   there's gonna be gold asml   in the  Netherlands.  That's   basically responsible for  every chip  that  everybody  makes some  people  might  call  them  a monopoly. How  powerful are they in   all of this?  And  should it be we be   worried about that power?  Well, a lot of  people   depend  on  them  to  build  the instrument  and they  do   build very  very  good   instruments.  And the  technology is very   complicated.  It  took  a  long time for them  to  build  it. There's no  reason  why  they  don't want  to provide   it  to the  world.  And so   I'm not so  I'm not sure   what  the question  is, but  but I'm not concerned.   I didn't  wake  But is. up   but is, this morning  But is.  concerned about the SML.  I  think they're  an excellent provider and and  they're they're they're  motivated this apply to us   and And this apply to us. and  this apply to us  And  this apply to us. you know,  so  I think everybody's  everybody's incentives  are  aligned when  I asked you a  management  question  because  it's  just  fascinating given  the success of  this  of this  company.  You constantly  say  even  at  this  point in the   Ballgame  you say I do   everything  I can not to go.   Out of  business. I do   everything  I can not to   fail  that  that  is  like  a  mantra  inside  the company  even  at  this  point.  What   is that about?  What  is that  about?  I think I think when   you when  you build a company  from  the ground  up  and  you've  you experienced real   real  adversity,  and and you  really  really  experienced  nearly   going out of business several  times that  that  feeling  stays with  you.  I wake up  every morning and in   you know, some  condition of   concern and and I don't  I don't wake  up  proud and  confident I wake up.   Worried and concerned about  you know, and so   it just depends on  which  side  of  the bed you get out  on. This  is  the Andy Grove   only  the paranoid survive.  Well, I think paranoia  needs  needs therapy.  I don't I  don't think I don't think  people  are trying  to   put me  out of  business. I  probably  know  they're  trying to and so  so  I  that's  different.  And so   so  I I live  in  this   condition where where we're  partly  partly  partly   desperate part. Lee,   you know  partly  partly   aspirational  and uh, let me   ask you then  about this  you  said  this  to   the New Yorker  and I found  it  fascinating again goes   to  this idea of  failure or   worries about failure,   but you said  this  and I  was like  news you can  this   is  a selfish question.  You said  I find  that  I  think best  when  I'm under  adversity and then  you said   my  heart rate actually goes   down. When  I'm under  adversity,  my  heart rate   goes  up  by  a lot.  Uh-huh.  Oh my let's see.  Well,  I think I think during   adversity you're more focused  and when  you're  more   focused you could you  perform better  and I like   I like, you know  know, the  last  last  five  minutes  before  before  something  you're more focused.  And so,  you know, I like to live  in   that  state where we're  we're about to perish about  we're we're where state that   live in to  like  I to   perish  and  Everything you know,   everything you know,  and so   so I  enjoy that  condition  and Everything you know,   everything you know,  and  I do  my  best  work  in   that  condition and I  you know, I like  going home   and telling condition,  my   condition wife  condition,  I  saved the company today and  and maybe maybe it  wasn't   true. But but I like   to think  so  and so   another question  we have  a lot of  Business  Leaders  and CEOs  here  and I think  they're going to  be   surprised to hear this  you  have  40  direct  reports.   So at the so at the So at the  company so at the 50 director  50  direct  Reports,  most   people  say I don't know  if   we have any consultants  in the  room, they'd   the room, in  consultants  have any  we  know if don't I  say they'd  say,  you know,  what  half  a dozen maybe  10, that  should be the  limit.  What's   your what's your  philosophy   or  Theory  here? Well, the  people  that  report  to  the  CEO should  require the least  amount  of  pampering.  And  so I  don't think they  need   life  advice. I don't think  they  need  career  guidance.  They  should  be  at the  top  of  their game  incredibly   good  at  their craft  their craft.  And unless   they  need  my  personal   help, you know, they  should   require very little  management. And so  so I   think that  one the  more the more direct  reports  of  CEO has the less layers  are in the  company and so   Co  so  I it allows us  to   keep  information fluid  allows us to  make sure that   that  everyone is  empowered by  Make sure  information make sure  Make sure and our company  that  you know  just   performs  better  because  you know,  everybody is aligned   you know  you know,  everybody's informed  of   what's  going on. I  want to open up to questions   in  just  a moment. So,  please  do  raise your   hand so I can find you  but I  want to ask you this  you did  a podcast recently  find you,  find you  and there  are a lot of  headlines about  it. And you said  during  the  podcast if  you could do  it   all over  again,  like  if   you could start  inventing again,   invading again, yeah, you  wouldn't. No, what  do you   what did  you mean? Why  I mean  you've done this   amazing thing?  Yeah, you're   worth forty billion dollars  personally. That  wasn't what  I meant.  First of all,  you know, I think it  would  be  disingenuous. If  I said   that  that  it  wasn't  quote  worth it. I enjoy a lot of   good  things  in  life. I've   got a great family. We  built  a great company.  All of   that  is  worth it. That   wasn't  what  I meant.  What   I meant was if  people   realized  how hard  something  is  and if  I were to  realize how hard it was how  many  times we're going to   fail  how the original   business  plan  had no, hope   of  succeeding. that  that   That  that  almost  the That   early Founders  that  we   built the whole company with   we  had to  completely   relearn just  about  everything. We  had to  know   if  I would have  known we   everything  all of  the  things that We  everything.  we  everything  I had to   know  in order  to be a CEO  everything  that  we  had  to solve  in  order to  be   where we are  that  mountain   of  work  that  melon of   you know  challenges   you know, the mountain  of   adversity and setback and  some amount of  humiliation  and a lot of  embarrassment.   If you want if you want to   If you want mount piled all  if you want of  that  on  in   1993  in  you know  on the   table of  a 29  year  old,  I  don't think I would have   done  it. I would you know, I  would have  said  there's  no way  I would know  all  this. There's no  way I could  learn all this. There's no   way we can  overcome  all  this. There's no  way  you know, this  is  a game   plan  that  that's not   going to  work. And so   that's  what  I meant that   I think I think the ignorance  of  enterpreneurs this   attitude  that  and I try to   do  to keep that  today,   which is  ask yourself.  How hard  could it be  you know you  approach   life with this attitude of   how hard  could it  be  they   could do  it  I could do  it   that  attitude  is   completely  helpful,   but it's  also  completely   wrong.  It's  very  helpful  because it  gives you courage  but it's  wrong because it   is  way harder  than  you  think.  Yes,  and and the  amount of skill that  is   necessary to  amount  of   knowledge as a  sentence   that's  necessary.  You know,  I think it's  one of  those  teenager  attitudes and and I  think I think we  I try to   keep  that  in  the company  that  teenage attitude  how  hard  can something can scan   something be, you know   gives you courage gives you  confidence. Let's I too seek   in one  question  or  two if   we  could I know  I Ron  Conway  had a question  last   time  for at a  different  moment. I know  if  he's   still in the  room. I felt   like  I should  give him   an opportunity  but I see  Gary  Lauder  there.  Hey,   Gary. So  so  there are So   a lot of  startups  so  and  not some non  startups  doing  AI  chips optimized for LMS.   Can you talk  about and they   claim to  be  dramatically   more  effective at energy  efficient than  now gpus. Can  you talk  about what   you're planning  on these roads? Yeah. First  of all, this  is  one of  the  great observations  that  we   made  in a  we  realized that  that  deep  learning  and AI   wasn't  was not a chip   problem.  It's  a reinvention  of  shooting problem   everything  from  how the  computer works  how  computer software Everything   everything  works the type of  software  that   was going to write  the way  that  we  write it  the way  we  develop software  today  using AI  creating  a i that   method of software  is   fundamentally different than   the way we  did it  before.  So  every aspect of computing  is  is  changed.  And in   fact, one of  the things   that  people don't realize   is  the vast  majority  of   computing today.  today is  a  retrieval model meaning just   all you have to ask Self what  happens when  you touch your   phone self what  someone like, you know,  Self what there's some   electrons go  to a  data   center  somewhere retrieves  the file  and brings it back   to  you in the  future. The  vast  majority  of  computing  is  going to  be  retrieval  plus  generation. And so  the  way that  Computing is  done   is  fundamentally changed  now,  we  have we observe  that  and realize that  about  a decade  and a half  ago.   I think a lot of  people  are  still trying to sort   that out. It  is the   reason why  you know, people   say,  oh, we're  practically the only  P'nay  doing it. It's  probably   because we're the only   company that  got it  and  people  are still trying  to   get it. You can't you can't  solve this  new way of doing   Computing by  just  designing  a chip  every aspect of the  computer  has fundamentally  changed and so  everything   from  networking  to  the  switching to  the way the  computers are designed  to   the chips and self  all of   the software   that sits on top  of  it   in the  methodology that   pulls it all  together. It's   It's a  big deal  because  it's a complete reinvention  of the  computer  industry.  And now we have a  trillion dollars  with   the data centers  in   the world.  All of  that   is going to give  retooled.  That's the  amazing thing.   We've got  we're in the beginning of a  brand new generation of  computing.  It  hasn't been  reinvented  in  60 years.  This  is  the this is why  such  a big deal  it's   hard for  people  to   wrap their  head around it.  But that's  that's  the that   was the great observation  that  we made is it includes   a trip, but it's  not about  that  ship  Jensen   Wong everybody. Thank you  very  very  much.  long everybody.  Thanks everybody