TYLER COWEN: Hello, Marc. If your entrance music 
were to be Beethoven, which symphony and why?  MARC ANDREESSEN: [chuckles] For those of you who 
do care and know who Tyler Cowen is, this is how   his podcasts start. This is how he intimidates 
his guests into submission. First of all, I   just wanted to say thank you, everybody, for being 
here with us today. We re really grateful that you   were all able to spend time with us. Hopefully, 
it's been useful. Second is I m going to get new   business cards printed up that say, You either 
know who I am, or you don t care. [chuckles]  COWEN: Or both.
ANDREESSEN: Or both. Let s   see. I guess we have to rule out Beethoven s Ninth 
Symphony because that s the official music of the   European Union, is that right?
COWEN: That s correct.  ANDREESSEN: That s the official 
anthem of the European Union.  COWEN: That s right.
ANDREESSEN: Which is just such   a terrible, mean thing for them to do to such 
a great piece of music like that. We should   lodge a formal diplomatic protest. I guess 
probably Beethoven s Fifth in retaliation.  COWEN: I would peg you as the Fifth.
ANDREESSEN: Yes.  COWEN: Now, how will AI make our world different 
five years from now? What s the most surprising   way in which it will be different?
ANDREESSEN: [chuckles] There s a great   breakdown on adoption of new technology that the 
science-fiction author Douglas Adams wrote about   years ago. He says any new technology is received 
differently by three different groups of people.   If you re below the age of 15, it s just the way 
things have always been. If you re between the   ages of 15 and 35, it s really cool, and you 
might be able to get a job doing it. If you   re above the age of 35, it s unholy and against 
the order of society and will destroy everything.  AI, I think, so far is living up to that 
framework. What I would like to tell you is   AI is going to be completely transformative 
for education. I believe that it will.  Having said that, I did recently roll out ChatGPT 
to my eight-year-old. I was very, very proud of   myself because I was like, Wow, this is just going 
to be such a great educational resource for him.   I felt like Prometheus bringing fire down from the 
mountain to my child. I installed it on his laptop   and said, Son, this is the thing that you can 
talk to anytime, and it will answer any question   you have. He said, Yes. I said, Well, no, this 
is a big deal. It answers questions. He s like,   Well, what else would you use a computer 
for? I was like, Oh, God, I m getting old.  [laughter]
I actually think there s a pretty good   prospect that kids are just going to pick this up 
and run with it. I actually think that s already   happening, right? ChatGPT is fully out, and Bard 
and Bing and all these other things. I think kids   are going to grow up with basically? ?you could 
use various terms, assistant, friend, coach,   mentor, tutor, but kids are going to grow up in 
this amazing back-and-forth relationship with AI.  Anytime a kid is interested in something, 
if there s not a teacher who can help with   something or if they don t have a friend who 
s interested in the same thing, they ll be   able to explore all kinds of ideas. I think it 
ll be great for that. I think it s obviously   going to be totally transformative and feels like 
warfare, and you already see that. The concern,   quite honestly? ?I actually wrote an essay a 
while ago on why AI won t destroy all the jobs.  The short version of it is because it s illegal to 
do that because so many jobs in the modern economy   require licensing and are regulated. I think the 
concern would be that there s just so much glue in   the system now that prevents change. It ll be very 
easy to not have AI healthcare or AI education or   whatever because, literally, some combination of 
doctor licensing, teacher unions, and so forth   will basically outlaw it. I think that s the risk.
COWEN: If we think of AI and its impact in   sociological terms, large language 
models, who will gain in status and   who will decline in status? How should 
this affect how we think about policy?  ANDREESSEN: First of all, it s important to 
qualify exactly what s going on with large   language models, which is super interesting. This 
thing has happened that you read about a lot in   the press, which is, there was this general 
idea that there would be something called   AI at some point, and then large language 
models appeared. And everybody said, A-ha,   that s AI just like we thought it would 
be, and then everybody extrapolates out.  That s true to a certain extent, but the success 
of large language models is very unexpected in the   field. Actually, the origin story of even ChatGPT 
is, this is not what OpenAI actually started   to do. They started to do something different. 
There s actually one guy. Actually, his name is,   I think, Alec Radford. He literally was off in 
the corner at OpenAI working on this in 2018,   2019. Then it basically was this revolution 
building on work that had been done at Google.   It was this very surprising thing.
Then it s important to qualify how   it works because it s not just like 
some sort of robot brain. What it is,   is you basically feed essentially, ideally all 
known human-generated information into a machine,   and then you let it basically build a giant matrix 
of numbers and basically correlate everything.  In a nutshell, that s what these things 
are. Then basically what happens is,   when you ask it a question or if you 
ask it to make a drawing or something,   it basically traverses. It essentially does a 
search. It does a search across basically all   of these words and sentences and diagrams 
and books and photos and everything that   human beings have created. It tries to 
find the optimal path through that. That   s how it generates the answer that it gives you.
Philosophically, it s this really profound thing,   I think, which is it s basically staring. It s 
like you as an individual using this machine to   stare at the entirety of the creation of all human 
knowledge and then have it played back at you. It   harnesses the creativity of thousands of years 
of human authors and artists and then derives   new kinds of answers or new kinds of images or 
whatever. Fundamentally, you re in interaction   with our civilization in a very profound way.
In terms of who gains and who loses status,   there s actually a very interesting thing 
happening in the research right now. There   s a very interesting research question 
for the impact on job scale, for example,   for people who work with words or work with images 
and are starting to use these technologies in the   workforce. The question is, who benefits more? The 
high-skilled worker? ?and think lawyer, doctor,   accountant, whatever, graphic designer? ?the 
high-skilled person who uses these tools to become   an additional quantum leap high-skilled. 
That would be a theory of separation.  The other scenario is the average or even 
low-skilled worker who gets upgraded. Of course,   just the nature of the economy there. There are 
more people in the middle. At least there s been   a series of research studies that have been coming 
back that it s actually the uplift to average. It   s actually more significant than the uplift to 
the high skill level. Actually, what seems to be   happening right now is it s actually a compression 
by lifting people up. Social questions are often   a zero-sum game of who gains and who loses. There 
may be something here where just a lot of people   just get better at what they do.
COWEN: Why is open-source AI in   particular important for national security?
ANDREESSEN: For a whole bunch of reasons. One is,   it is really hard to do security without open 
source. There are actually two schools of thought   on information security, computer security 
broadly, that have played out over the last   50 years. There was one school of security that 
says you want to basically hide the source code,   and you want to hide the source code precisely. 
This seems intuitive because, presumably,   you want to hide the source code so that bad guys 
can t find the flaws in it, right? Presumably,   that would be the safe way to do things.
Then over the course of the last 30 or 40 years,   basically, what s evolved is the realization 
in the field (and I think very broadly) that   actually, that s a mistake. In the software 
field, we call that security through obscurity,   right? We hide the code. People can t exploit 
it. The problem, of course, is: okay, but that   means the flaws are still in there, right?
If anybody actually gets to the code,   they just basically have a complete index of 
all the problems. There s a whole bunch of   ways for people to get the code. They hack in. 
It s actually very easy to steal software code   from a company. You hire the janitorial staff to 
stick a USB stick into a machine at 3:00 in the   morning. Software companies are very easily 
penetrated. It turned out, security through   obscurity was a very bad way to do it. The much 
more secure way to do it is actually open source.  Basically, put the code in public and then 
basically build the code in such a way that   when it runs, it doesn t matter whether somebody 
has access to the code. It s still fully secure,   and then you just have a lot more eyes on the 
code to discover the problems. In general,   open source has turned out to be much more secure. 
I would start there. If we want secure systems,   I think this is what we have to do.
COWEN: What s the biggest adjustment   problem governments will face as AI progresses? 
For instance, if drug discovery goes up by 3X,   all of a sudden, the FDA is overloaded. 
If regulatory comments are open,   AI can write great regulatory comments. What does 
government have to do to get by in this new world?  ANDREESSEN: By the way, hopefully, at least 
the first of those two scenarios happens,   maybe also the second. For anything like this, 
what there should be is there should be a   corresponding phenomenon happening on the other 
side, right? The government correspondingly then   should be using AI to evaluate new drugs. Company 
shows up in their drug design. There should be AI   Assist to the FDA to help them evaluate new drugs.
A regulatory agency that has public comments   should have AI Assist for being able to be able 
to process all that information and be able to   aggregate it and then be able to reply back to 
everybody. This is kind of true. This is a very   interesting thing about AI. Every possible threat 
you can think of AI posing, basically, there is a   corresponding defense that has to get built.
I ll pick another one. Cybersecurity people   are quite, I think, legitimately concerned 
that AI s going to make it easier to actually   create and launch cybersecurity attacks. 
Correspondingly, there should be better   defenses. There should be AI-based cybersecurity 
defenses. By the way, we see the exact same thing   with drones. Weaponized AI autonomous drones are 
clearly a threat, as we see in the world today,   so we need AI defenses against drones. 
The cynical view would be this is just   a classic arms race? ?attack, defense, attack, 
defense? ?and does the world get any better if   there s just more threats and more defenses?
I think the positive way of looking at it is,   we probably need these defenses anyway, right? 
Even if we didn t have AI drug discovery,   I think we should be using AI to evaluate 
drugs. Even if we didn t have AI drones,   we should still have defense against standard 
missiles and against enemy aircraft. Even if we   didn t have AI-driven cyberattacks, we should 
have AI-driven cyber defenses. I think this   is an opportunity for the defenders to not 
only keep up but also build better systems   for the present-day threat landscape also.
COWEN: The Biden AI directive, what s the best   thing about it? What s the worst thing about it?
ANDREESSEN: The best thing about it is it didn   t overtly attempt to kill AI. That was 
good. You never know with these things,   how much teeth they re going to try to 
put into it. Then, of course, there s   always the question of whether it stands up in 
court. Look, there were things that were being   discussed in the process that were much worse, 
and I think much more hostile to the technology,   than ended up being in it. I think that s good 
news. I think it was quite benign in terms of   its just flat-out directives, which is good.
People have different opinions. My opinion,   the issue of it is, it green-lit essentially 15 
different regulatory agencies to basically put   AI under their purview in undefined 
ways. We will now have, I think,   a relatively protracted process of many regulators 
or many agencies without explicit authority in the   domain basically inserting themselves into 
the space. Then presumably, at some point,   there will be a determination of who has purview 
over what, but it seems like we re in for a   period of quite a bit of confusion as a result.
COWEN: How much more green energy do we need to,   in essence, fuel all of this AI, and 
where will it come from? What do you   see the prospect is like for the next 20 years?
ANDREESSEN: The good news of AI? ?and the good   news also, by the way, with crypto because there s 
always a lot of controversy around crypto and Web3   and blockchain around energy use. The good thing 
with these technologies, the good news from energy   is these systems lend themselves to centralization 
of data centers, right? If we need a million to go   into 10 million go to 100 million to a billion AI 
chips, they could be distributed out all over the   place, but they can also be highly centralized.
Because you can highly centralize them,   you can think not just in terms of building a 
server. You can think about building, basically,   a data center that s an integrated thing from the 
chip, basically, all the way to the building or   to the complex of buildings. Then, the way those 
modern data centers are built by the leading-edge   companies now is, they re built on day one with 
an integrated strategy for energy and for cooling.  Basically, any form of energy that you have that 
you could do in a very efficient way, in a very   clean way, or new energy technologies, AI is a 
use case for developing and deploying that kind   of power. Just building on what we ve seen from 
internet data centers, that could be geothermal,   that could be hydroelectric, that could be nuclear 
fission, that could be nuclear fusion, solar,   wind, big battery packs, and so forth. 
I think the aspirational hope would be,   this is another catalyst, a more advanced rollout 
of energy. Even if there s net energy increase,   the motivation to get to higher levels of 
efficiency will be net good and helping us   get to a better energy footprint.
COWEN: Which of those energy   sources in your view is most underrated?
ANDREESSEN: Oh, nuclear fission, for sure,   is the most underrated today. Yes, wave a magic 
wand, we ought to be doing what Richard Nixon   proposed in 1971, right? We ought to build what he 
called Project Independence, which built 1,000 new   nuclear power plants in the US and then cut the 
entire US grid over to nuclear and electricity,   go to all-electric cars, do everything else.
Richard Nixon s other great corresponding   creation, the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, of 
course, guarantees that won t happen. [chuckles]   The plan [isn t] exactly on track. But we could, 
either with existing nuclear-efficient technology   or there s actually a significant number now of 
new nuclear-efficient startups, as well as fusion   startups working on new designs. And so this 
would certainly be a great use case for that.  COWEN: If the nations that will do well in the 
future are strong in AI and strong in energy,   thinking about this in terms of geopolitics, which 
countries rise in importance, for better or worse?  ANDREESSEN: Well, okay, different things. Add 
a couple more things to that, which is, which   [countries] are in a position to best invent these 
new technologies? Then there s a somewhat separate   question of who s in the best position to deploy 
because it doesn t help you that much to invent if   you can t deploy it. I would put that in there.
Look, I would give the US very, very high marks   on the invention side. I think we re the best. I 
think we have the best R&D innovation capability   in the world in most fields? ?not all, but most. I 
think that s certainly true of AI. I think that s,   at least, potentially true in energy. I don t 
know whether it actually is, but it could be.   We should be able to forge ahead on that. China 
is clearly the other country with critical mass   in all of this. You could quibble about the 
level of invention versus fast follow and talk   about IP acquisition, things like that.
Nevertheless, whatever your view is,   they re moving very quickly and aggressively and 
have critical mass, big internal domestic market,   and a huge number of researchers and a lot 
of state support. I think, by and large,   for sure on AI, and then I think probably 
also in energy, we re probably looking at   primarily a bipolar world for quite a while 
and then spheres of influence going out.  I would say Europe is a dark horse in a strange 
way, in that the EU seems absolutely determined   to ban everything, to put a blanket ban 
on capitalism and, within that, ban AI   and ban energy. On the other hand, we have this 
incredible AI company called Mistral in France,   which is the leading open-source AI company 
right now and one of the best AI companies   in the world. The French government has actually 
really been stepping up to help the ecosystem in   Europe. I would actually like to see a tripolar 
world. I d like to see the EU fully punch in,   but I m not sure how realistic that is.
COWEN: Let s say you re in charge of   speeding up deployment in the United States. 
What is it you do? State level, local level,   feds, what should we all be doing?
ANDREESSEN: Of AI specifically?  COWEN: Everything.
ANDREESSEN: Of everything?  COWEN: Because it s all 
increasingly interrelated, right?  ANDREESSEN: Yes, it is.
COWEN: AI, energy, biomedicine, everything.  ANDREESSEN: Yes, and AI takes you straight 
to chips, which takes you straight to the   CHIPS Act, which?
COWEN: Exactly.  ANDREESSEN:? ?has not yet resulted in the creation 
of any chip plants, although it might someday.   Look, the most basic observation is maybe the 
most banal, which is: Stagnation is a choice.   Decline is a choice. As Tyler has written at great 
length, the US economy downshifted its rate of   technological change basically since the 1960s. 
Technological change is measured by productivity.   Growth in the economy was much faster prior to 
the last 50 years than the most recent 50 years.  You have a big argument as to exactly what 
caused that, but a lot of it is just an   imposition of just blankets and blankets and 
blankets of regulation and restrictions and   controls and processes and procedures and all 
the rest of it. Then you could start by saying,   step one is do no harm. This is our approach 
on AI regulation, which is, don t regulate the   technology. Don t regulate AI as a technology any 
more than you regulated microchips or software   or anything like operating systems or databases.
Instead, regulate the use cases. The use cases are   generally regulated anyway. It s no more legal to 
field a new AI-designed drug without FDA approval   than it is a standard-designed drug. Apply the 
existing regulations as opposed to hamstringing   the technology. That s one. Energy exploitation? 
?again, the energy is just pure choice. We could   be building the 1,000 nuclear plants tomorrow.
My favorite idea there, which always gets me in   trouble and so I can t resist, is the Democratic 
administration should give Koch Industries the   contract to build 1,000 nuclear reactors. 
Everybody gets revenge at everybody else.   The Democrats get Charles Koch to fix climate 
change, and then Charles gets all the money for   the contracts. Everybody ends up happy. Nobody 
yet has bit on that idea when I pitched it, but   maybe I m not talking to the right people. Look, 
we could be doing that. We ll see if we choose to.  The chips plant thing is going to be fascinating 
to watch. We passed the CHIPS Act. In theory,   the funding is available. The American chip 
companies are generally pretty aggressive,   and I think trying pretty hard to build new 
capacity in the US. There was this actually   very outstanding article in the New York Times 
some months back by Ezra Klein, where he goes   through and he says, Okay, even suppose the money 
s available to build chip plants, is it actually   possible to build chip plants in the US? He talks 
about all of the different regulatory and legal   requirements and obligations that get layered 
on top. It was speculating as to whether any   of these plants will actually get built.
Again, I think here we have just a level   of fundamental choices to society, which is, 
do we want to build new things? I can t say,   at least on the West Coast, how exciting 
it s been for Las Vegas to get the Sphere   because it s now impossible to visit Las Vegas 
without? ?everybody is always complaining,   The Egyptians built the pyramids. Where are 
our pyramids? It s like, Ah, we have a Sphere.  [laughter]
Just like flying into Vegas just gets your juices   flowing, gets you all fired up because this thing 
is amazing. By the way, I m just talking about the   view from the outside. I understand that the thing 
on the inside is also amazing. We clearly can do   that, at least in Vegas. Where Ben lives now, in 
London, I think they just gave up on building the   Sphere, so that s the other side of it. We do 
have to decide whether we want these things to   happen. It was a little bit dispiriting to see the 
liquid natural gas decision that just came down.  COWEN: Are the roots of this stasis quite general 
and quite cultural? Because parents coddle   their children much more, there are higher 
rates of mental illness amongst the young,   young people? ?it seems? ?have less sex, along 
a lot of cultural variables? ?the percent of   old music people listen to compared to new music. 
There seems to be a more general stagnation. How   would you pinpoint our loss of self-confidence 
or dynamism? Where s that coming from?  ANDREESSEN: Well, first of all, to 
be clear, we re very much in favor   of young people not dating because that s very 
distracting from their work at our startups.  [laughter]
That works out fine. Unfortunately,   in our industry, we have a long experience with 
not having dating lives when we re young, so that   works out well. [chuckles] It s not all bad. It 
is really interesting. Look, Silicon Valley has   all kinds of problems, and we re a case study for 
a lot of it. Look, it s not like you can build   anything in Silicon Valley, right? Our politicians 
absolutely hate us. They don t let us do anything   if they can avoid it. We have our issues.
The view from the Valley is, yes,   a lot of kids are being brought up and trained to 
basically adopt a fundamentally pessimistic or,   how to put it, stagnation-oriented, inert, 
have very low expectations. Basically,   a lot of what passes for education now is 
teaching people how to complain, which they   re very good at. The complaining has reached 
operatic levels lately. There is a lot of that.  Having said that, look, I m also actually really 
optimistic. In particular, I m actually quite   optimistic about the new generation coming up. 
I think Gen Z, and then I think it s Gen Alpha,   and then it s whatever an eight-year-old is. We 
re seeing more and more kids that are coming up,   and they re being exposed to a full load of 
basically cultural programming education,   programming that says you should be depressed 
about everything. You should be upset about   everything. You should have low ambitions. You 
shouldn t try to do these things. They re coming   out with a very radical hard shove in the other 
direction. They re coming up with tremendous   energy and tremendous enthusiasm to actually do 
things, which is very natural because kids rebel.  If the system is teaching stagnation, then 
at least some kids will come up the other way   and decide they really want to do things in the 
world. I think entrepreneurs in their 20s now are   a lot better than certainly my generation. 
They re frankly more aggressive than the   generation that preceded them, and they re more 
ambitious. Now, we re dealing with a minority,   not a majority, but I think there s quite a 
bit? ?every hour I get that I can spend at   20-year-olds is actually very encouraging.
COWEN: One emotional sense I get from your   walk-on music, Beethoven s Fifth Symphony, is 
just that the stakes are remarkably high. Now,   if we re looking for indicators to 
keep track of whether, in essence,   things are going your way? ?greater dynamism, 
freedom to build, willingness to build, American   dynamism? ?what should we track? What should we 
look at? How do we know if things are going well?  ANDREESSEN: Look, I do not come here and do not 
come to the world with comprehensive answers.   The overall answer is, productivity growth 
in the economy is a great starting point.   Economic growth is a great starting point. The 
overall questions are there. Most of our economy   is dominated by incumbent institutions 
that have no intention, I don t think,   of changing or evolving unless they re forced to.
Certainly, most of the business world now is one   form of oligopoly or another that has various 
markets locked up. I don t think there s some   magic bullet to hugely accelerate things. Having 
said that, I think attacking from the edges is the   thing that can be done, which is basically 
what we do, what Silicon Valley does. Then   when you attack from the edges the way that 
our entrepreneurs do, a lot of the times,   they don t succeed. It s a high-risk 
occupation with a lot of risk of failure.  When they succeed, they can succeed 
spectacularly well. We have companies   in American economy that were venture-backed 
in the 1970s and, actually, even some that   were venture-backed in the 1990s and 2000s that 
are now bigger than most national economies,   right? Was it Apple? I think Apple s market 
cap is bigger than the entire market cap   of the German stock market.
COWEN: I think that s right.  ANDREESSEN: Just one company. Apple was a 
venture-backed startup. Two kids in a garage   in 1976, not that long ago. It s bigger than the 
entire German industrial public market. Attacking   from the edges, sometimes you can get really, 
really big results. Sometimes you just prod the   system. Sometimes you just spark people into 
reacting, and that pushes everything forward.  Then the other question always is just like, from 
our standpoint, what are the tools that startups   have to try to really change things? There s a 
bunch of such tools, but there s always two that   really dominate. One is just, what s the magnitude 
of the technological change in the air that can   be harnessed? We re always looking for the next 
super cycle, the next breakthrough technology,   which you can imagine 1,000 companies doing many 
different things, all punching into incumbent   markets. AI certainly seems like one of those.
Then, yes, the other is just the sheer animalistic   ambition, energy, animal spirits of the 
entrepreneurs and of the teams that get built.   Like I said, I think the best of the startups 
today are more aggressive, more ambitious,   more capable. The people are better. They 
execute better than at least I ve ever seen.   I think that s also quite positive.
COWEN: Who s a social thinker who   helps you make sense of these trends?
ANDREESSEN: Oh, yes, my favorite is James   Burnham. He s my favorite.
COWEN: Why Burnham?  ANDREESSEN: Why Burnham? Burnham is not 
famous, but he should be famous. Burnham   has a fascinating story. He s a thinker in the 
20th century who talked a lot about these issues.   He started out life, as a lot of people do in 
the 1920s and 30s, as a dedicated Trotskyite,   full-on communist. He s a very special guy. 
Burnham was a very brilliant guy. He was such   a dedicated communist that he was close personal 
friends with Leon Trotsky, which is how you really   know how you ve made it when you re a communist.
He would have these huge arguments with Trotsky,   which is not the safest thing in the world 
to do. Apparently, he got away with it. Very   enthusiastic communist revolutionary through the 
30s. Then in the 40s, he s a very smart guy and he   started to figure out that was a bad path. He went 
through this process of rethinking everything. By   the 1950s, he was so far to the right that he was 
actually a co-founder of National Review magazine   with William Buckley, who always said he was the 
intellectual leading light at National Review.  He s got works that he wrote that will accommodate 
the full spectrum of politics. In his middle   period where he was trying to figure out? ?this 
is like in the 1940s? ?he was trying to figure   out where things are going. There were enormous 
questions in the 1940s because it was viewed as a   three-way war for the future between communism on 
the far left, fascism on the far right, and then   liberal democracy floating around there somewhere.
His best, most well-known book is called The   Managerial Revolution, which talks a lot about the 
issues we ve been discussing, and it was written   in 1941. It s fascinating for many reasons, part 
of which is, he was still mad about communism. He   debunks communism in it. Also, they didn t know 
who was going to win World War II. It talks about   this battle of ideologies as if it were still 
an open topic, which is super interesting.  He did this very Marxian analysis of capitalism. 
He made the observation that I see every day,   which is there are fundamentally two types 
of capitalism. There s the original model of   capitalism, which he calls bourgeois capitalism, 
which you could think like Henry Ford is the   archetype of that. A capitalist starts a 
company, runs the company, name on the door,   ownership of the company, control the 
company, dictator of the company, complete   alignment of a company with an individual.
Then he talks about this other emerging form   of capitalism at that time called managerial 
capitalism. In managerial capitalism, you think   about today s modern public companies. Think about 
Walmart or whatever, any public company where,   in theory, there are shareholders. Really, what 
there are is, there are millions and millions   of shareholders that are incredibly dispersed. 
Everybody in this room owns some three shares   of Walmart stock in a mutual fund somewhere.
You don t wake up in the morning wondering what   s happening to Walmart. It doesn t even occur to 
you to think about yourself as an owner. What you   get instead is this managerial class of actually 
both investors like fund managers and then   also executives and CEOs who actually run these 
companies. They have control, but without ultimate   responsibility, without ultimate ownership.
The interesting thing he said about that is,   he said, Look, managerialism is, basically, 
it s not that it s good or bad. It just is   necessary because companies and institutions 
and governments and all the rest of it get to   the point where they re just too big and too 
complicated for one person to run everything.   You re going to have the emergence of this 
managerial class who s going to run things.  There s a flip side of it, which is, the 
people who are qualified to be managers of   large organizations are not themselves the kind 
of people who become bourgeois capitalists. They   re the other kind of person. They re often 
good at running things, but they generally   don t do new things. They generally don t seek 
to disrupt or seek to create or seek to invent.  One way of thinking about what s happened in 
our system is, capitalism used to be bourgeois   capitalism. It got replaced by managerial 
capitalism without actually changing the   name. That will necessarily lead to stagnation. By 
the way, that may be necessary that that happens   because the systems are too complicated, but 
that will necessarily lead to stagnation.  Then what you need is, basically, the resumption 
of bourgeois capitalism to come back in and,   at the very least, poke and prod everybody 
into action. That, aspirationally,   is what we do and what our startups do.
COWEN: Marc Andreessen, thank you very much.  ANDREESSEN: Good. Great. Thank you, everybody.
[applause]