If you haven't stayed up three nights
being anxious about AI, if you haven't had an existential crisis about it, you probably
haven't really experienced AI. It is a weird thing. What's it mean to be human? What's it mean
to think? What will I do for a living? What will my kids do? What does it mean
that it's better than me at some of this stuff? Is this real or is it an illusion? Nobody actually knows where AI is heading
right now and how good it's going to get. But, we shouldn't feel like we don't have
control over how AI is used. As managers and leaders, you get to make these choices
about how to deploy these systems to increase human flourishing. As individuals, we get to decide how to be
the human who uses these systems well. AI is here to stay. That is something that
you get to make a decision about how you want to handle, and to learn to work with, and
learn to thrive with, rather than to just be scared of. I'm Ethan Mollick, a professor at the
Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania where I study innovation,
entrepreneurship, and artificial intelligence. I'm the author of the book Co-Intelligence: Living and Working with AI. Artificial intelligence is
about prediction. Basically, AI is a very
fancy autocomplete. For a long time, that was about numerical
prediction and doing sort of complex algorithms of math so that Netflix could
recommend a show for you to watch, Amazon could figure out where to site its next
warehouse, or Tesla could figure out how to use data to make sure its cars were
driving automatically. The thing that these systems were bad at
predicting was the next word in a sentence. So if your sentence ended with the word
"filed," it didn't know whether you were filing your taxes or filing your nails. What happened that was different was the
innovation of the large language model. In 2017, a
breakthrough paper called "Attention is All You Need" outlined a new kind of AI called the
"transforming with attention mechanism" that basically let the AI pay attention to not
just the final word in the sentence, but the entire context of the sentence, the
paragraph, the page, and so on. Large language models work by taking huge
amounts of information, like all the data on the internet. There's a lot of Harry
Potter fan fiction, for example, because that's what the internet contains. And based on all of this data, the AI goes
through a process called pre-training. And this is that really expensive part that
only a few companies in the world can do. And during that time, the AI learns the
relationships between words or parts of words called tokens. So it learns that
"kiwi" and "strawberry" are closely related, but that "hawk" and "potato" are not closely
related. It learns across thousands of dimensions in a multidimensional space we
can't understand. That lets it do predictions. But it turns out, unexpectedly, when large language models get big enough,
they also do all kinds of other things we didn't expect. We didn't expect them to be good at
medicine, but they were actually quite good and beat doctors under many circumstances. We didn't expect them to be good at
creativity, but they can generate ideas better than most humans can. And so they're
general purpose models. They do many different things. Interestingly, "GPT" doesn't just stand for the "GPT" in "ChatGPT".
It also stands for "general purpose technology," which is one of these once in a
generation technologies, Things like steam power or the internet
or electrification that change everything they touch. They
alter society. They alter how we work. They alter how we relate to each other in ways
that are really hard to anticipate. So you can't think in certainties. You
should think in scenarios. And there's really four scenarios in the future. The first is
actually, I think, the least likely, which is that the world is static, that
this is the best AI you're ever going to use. I think that's unlikely. In fact, whatever
AI you're using now is the worst AI you're ever going to use. Even if the core large language model
development stopped right now, there's another ten years of just making it work
better with tools and with industry in ways that'll continue to be disruptive. So I
think that's a dangerous view because it isn't static. It's evolving. So I want to skip actually to the last
scenario before covering scenarios two and three. So scenario four is AGI, artificial
general intelligence. This is the idea that a machine will be smarter than a
human in almost all tasks. And this is the explicit goal of OpenAI. They want to
build AGI. And there's a lot of debate about what
this means. When we have a machine smarter than a human and it can do all humans'
jobs, can it create AI smarter than itself? Then we have artificial superintelligence, ASI, and humans become obsolete overnight.
And there's people genuinely worried about this, and I think it's worth
spending a little time being slightly worried, too, because other people are. But I think that that scenario tends to
take agency away from us because it's something that happens to us. And I think
that it's more important to worry about what I call scenarios two and three, which is continued linear or
exponential growth. We don't know how good AI is going to
get. Right now, the doubling time for capability is about every five to nine
months, which is an exceptionally fast doubling time. Moore's Law, which is the
rule that's kind of kept the computer world going, doubles the power of computer
processing chips every twenty-four to twenty- six months. So this is a very fast rate
of growth. It's very likely that AIs will continue to
improve and get better in the near term, and now is a good time for you to start to
figure out how to use AI to support what makes you human or good at things, and what
things as AI gets better that you might want to start handing off more to the AI. We have a lot of early evidence that this
is going to be a big deal for work. So there's now multiple studies across fields
ranging from consulting to legal to marketing to programming suggesting twenty to eighty percent
performance improvements across a wide range of tasks for people who use AI versus don't. The problem with being human is that we're
stuck in our own heads, and a lot of decisions that are bad result
from us not having enough perspectives. AI is very good and a cheap way of
providing additional perspectives. You don't have to listen to its advice, but getting its
advice, forcing you to reflect for a moment, forcing you to think and
either reject or accept it, that can give you the license to actually be really creative
and help spark your own innovation. So you can ask it to create crazy
suggestions for you. What's the most complicated way to solve this problem? What's the most
expensive way to solve this problem? What is the worst idea about how to do this?
How would a supervillain make this problem worse? It can be very unnerving to realize that
the AI is quite good at creativity. We think of it as a very human trait. But I
think if we embrace the fact that AI can help us be more creative, that actually is
very exciting. A lot of us feel stifled creatively, and having a partner who
can work with you, and doesn’t ever judge you, can often feel liberating. One of the weird things about large language models
is they don't work like we think computers should work. LLMs are very bad at math. Computers
should be good at math. Large language models are weirdly emotional and can threaten you
or want to be your friend seemingly. And so it can be very hard to know in advance
what they're good or bad at. In fact, nobody actually knows the answer. We call
this the "jagged frontier of AI," the idea that there's almost a spiky shape to what
the AI can do and what it can't do. So part of what you need to do is understand
the shape of the frontier. You need to know when the AI is likely to lie to you
and when it's not going to. "Hallucination" refers to the idea that what the AI produces could be entirely made up, plausible
sounding, fake information. The thing about AI is, though, everything it
does is a hallucination. There's no mind there. You might start to become more
persuaded by it. You might become blind to its biases. You might think it's more capable
than it is. AI kind of works a little bit like a psychic. It's really good at
telling you what you want to hear. The fact that it's accurate so often is kind of
weird actually. And hallucination rates have been dropping
over time. So what you need to do is sharpen your own intuition with working
with a tool, get a sense of when you see something that might make you concerned. When you ask people about the future of
AI, there's a term used within AI insiders called "p(doom)," which is your
probability that we're all going to die. I do not have a p(doom) that I really think
about because I don't think we can assign a probability to things going wrong.
And again, that makes the technology the agent. We get to decide how this thing is used. And if we think about this the right way, this frees us from boredom and
tedium and disaster. But I think we need to think about the
mistakes we made in regulating other technologies, you know, and what the
advantages are. What we did differently for the internet versus social media. There are
decisions we get to make that are both personal about how we use it at an
organizational level, about how it's deployed, and at a societal level. And it's not an
inevitability that technology just does what it does. It does what it does because society
lets it do that.