A.I., Brain Scans and Cameras: The Spread of Police Surveillance Tech
NY Times · by Adam Satariano · March 30, 2023

Dubai’s police run next-generation surveillance systems from a headquarters north of the city’s downtown skyscrapers and malls.Credit...The New York Times
A.I., Brain Scans and Cameras: The Spread of Police Surveillance Tech

In the Middle East, artificial intelligence and other emerging technologies have become part of everyday policing.

Dubai’s police run next-generation surveillance systems from a headquarters north of the city’s downtown skyscrapers and malls.Credit...The New York Times


By Paul Mozur and

Paul Mozur and Adam Satariano, who cover surveillance and censorship technology, reported from Dubai, United Arab Emirates.

March 30, 2023
A brain wave reader that can detect lies. Miniaturized cameras that sit inside vape pens and disposable coffee cups. Massive video cameras that zoom in more than a kilometer to capture faces and license plates.

At a police conference in Dubai in March, new technologies for the security forces of the future were up for sale. Far from the eyes of the general public, the event provided a rare look at what tools are now available to law enforcement around the world: better and harder-to-detect surveillance, facial recognition software that automatically tracks individuals across cities and computers to break into phones.

Advances in artificial intelligence, drones and facial recognition have created an increasingly global police surveillance business. Israeli hacking software, American investigation tools and Chinese computer vision algorithms can all be bought and mixed together to make a snooping cocktail of startling effectiveness.

Fueled by a surge of spending from Middle Eastern countries such as the United Arab Emirates — the conference’s host and an aggressive adopter of next-generation security technologies — the event pointed to how tools of mass surveillance once believed to be widespread only in China are proliferating. The rising use of the technologies signals an era of policing based as much on software, data and code as on officers and weaponry, raising questions about the effects on people’s privacy and how political power is wielded.

“A lot of surveillance could ostensibly be benign or used to improve a city,” said Daragh Murray, a senior lecturer of law at Queen Mary University in London who has studied police use of technology. “But the flip side of the coin is it can give you incredible insight into people’s everyday lives. That can have an unintended chilling effect or be a tool for actual repression.”


Technologies shown at the police conference in Dubai included a Segway scooter with a machine gun attached.Credit...The New York Times
Thank you for your patience while we verify access.

Already a subscriber? Log in.

Want all of The Times? Subscribe.

NY Times · by Adam Satariano · March 30, 2023
SUMMARY
HIGHLIGHTS
Loading...