The Worlds I See
Fei-Fei Li

Increased attention was being paid to algorithms that solved problems by discovering patterns from examples, rather than being explicitly programmed—in other words, learning what to do rather than being told. Researchers gave it a fitting name: “machine learning.”

Although it had taken more than a half century for the necessary preconditions to align—historic milestones in the evolution of algorithms, large-scale data, and raw computing power, all converging at the dawn of the 2010s—it took less than a half decade for the capabilities they unleashed to change the world.

It matters what motivates the development of AI, in both science and industry, and I believe that motivation must explicitly center on human benefit.

The founding ideals of this country, however imperfectly they’ve been practiced in the centuries since, seemed as wise a foundation as any on which to build the future of technology: the dignity of the individual, the intrinsic value of representation, and the belief that human endeavors are best when guided by the many, rather than the few.

Hubel and Wiesel’s epiphany was that perception doesn’t occur in a single layer of neurons, but across many, organized in a hierarchy that begins with the recognition of superficial details and ends with complex, high-level awareness.

Finally, Yann LeCun, one of Hinton’s first students, famously applied it all to an impressively practical task: reading handwritten ZIP codes. In less than a decade, machine learning had progressed from a tenuous dream to a triumph in the real world.

Vision, therefore, is not merely an application of our intelligence. It is, for all practical purposes, synonymous with our intelligence.

This revolution must build on that foundation, faithfully. It must respect the collective dignity of a global community. And it must always remember its origins: the restless imagination of an otherwise unremarkable species of hominid, so mystified by its own nature that it now seeks to re-create it in silicon. This revolution must, therefore, be unequivocally human-centered.

“Guys, I’m begging you—please don’t just download the latest preprints off arXiv every day. Read Russell and Norvig’s book. Read Minsky and McCarthy and Winograd. Read Hartley and Zisserman. Read Palmer. Read them because of their age, not in spite of it. This is timeless stuff. It’s important.”

For all our limitations, human perception is the antithesis of this. We see the world holistically, not just identifying but understanding its contents—their relationships, their meanings, their pasts, and their futures. We aren’t merely witnesses, but storytellers. It felt like it was time for algorithms to learn how to do the same.