Prompting Guide Google


Prompting
guide 101
A quick-start
handbook for
effective prompts
April 2024 edition
1
Writing effective prompts
From the very beginning, Google Workspace was built to allow you to collaborate in real time with other people.
Now, you can also collaborate with AI using Gemini for Google Workspace to help boost your productivity and
creativity without sacrificing privacy or security. The embedded generative AI-powered features can help you
write, organize, visualize, accelerate workflows, have richer meetings, and much more, all while using your
favorite apps like Gmail, Google Docs, Google Sheets, Google Meet, and Google Slides.
This book provides you with the foundational skills to write effective, instructional prompts when using Gemini
for Workspace so that you can be more productive and efficient in your day-to-day tasks. You can think of
a prompt as a conversation starter with your AI-powered assistant. You might write several prompts as the
conversation progresses. While the possibilities are virtually endless, there are consistent best practices that
you can put to use today.
There are four main areas to consider when writing an effective prompt. You don’t need to use all four,
but using a few will help!
•
•
•
•
Persona
Task
Context
Format
Here is an example of a prompt using all four areas that could work well in Gmail and Google Docs:
You are a Google Cloud program manager. [details about relevant program docs]. Draft an executive summary email to Limit to bullet points.
[persona] based on
Here are quick tips to get you started with Gemini for Workspace:
1. Use natural language. Write as if you’re speaking to another person. Express complete thoughts in
full sentences.
2. Be specific and iterate. Tell Gemini for Workspace what you need it to do (summarize, write, change the
tone, create). Provide as much context as possible.
3. Be concise and avoid complexity. State your request in brief — but specific — language. Avoid jargon.
4. Make it a conversation. Fine-tune your prompts if the results don’t meet your expectations or if you believe
there’s room for improvement. Use follow-up prompts and an iterative process of review and refinement to
yield better results.
2
Prompting is an art. You will likely need to try a few different approaches
for your prompt if you don’t get your desired outcome the first time. Based
on what we have learned during our Workspace Labs program, the most
successful prompts average around 21 words, yet prompts people often
try without knowing this are short — usually less than nine words.
Generative AI and all of its possibilities are exciting, but it’s still new.
Even though our models are getting better every day, our prompts
can sometimes have unpredictable responses.
Before putting an output from Gemini for Workspace into action, review
it to ensure clarity, relevance, and accuracy. And of course the most
important thing to keep in mind: Generative AI is meant to help humans
but the final output is yours.
The example prompts in this guide are meant for illustrative purposes.
3
3
Table of contents
Writing effective prompts. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page 2
Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page 5
Customer service.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page 7
Executives and entrepreneurs.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page 13
Human resources. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page 20
Marketing.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page 26
Project management. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page 32
Sales. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page 36
Leveling up your prompt writing. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Page 43
4
Introduction
Gemini for Google Workspace: Prompting 101
There are multiple ways to access the generative AI features of Gemini for Google Workspace. It is a powerful
generative AI experience that is seamlessly integrated into the apps you use every day — Gmail, Google Docs,
Google Sheets, Google Meet, and Google Slides. And you can visit gemini.google.com to chat with Gemini
(with Google Workspace enterprise-grade security and privacy).
Understanding what makes an effective prompt and learning to craft prompts on the fly will supercharge
your productivity and creativity. You can think of Gemini for Workspace as your AI-powered assistant that
can help you:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Improve your writing
Organize data
Create original images
Summarize information and surface insights
Foster meaningful connections with colleagues
Research unfamiliar topics
Spot trends, synthesize information, and identify business opportunities
Gemini for Workspace helps you to work smarter, not harder, increasing productivity and saving time so you
can focus on higher-impact work. This guide explores different ways to quickly jump in and gain mastery of the
basics to help you accomplish your day-to-day tasks.
As you gain confidence and familiarity with this new way of working, you’ll be ready to explore increasingly
complex prompts that enable you to enhance entire workflows, where Gemini for Workspace can be your
thought partner, writing coach, and more.
The opportunities to improve your productivity and creativity are nearly endless with Gemini for Workspace.
5
How to use this prompt guide
This handbook is a quick-start guide to introduce you to prompting with Gemini for Workspace. It includes
scenarios for different personas, examples of use cases, and potential prompts for everyday tasks performed
by executives, founders, and professionals in sales, marketing, customer service, project management, and
human resources.
You will notice a variety of prompt styles. Some have bracketed items, which indicate where you would fill in
specific details. Other prompts are presented without variables marked to show you what a full prompt could
look like. All of the prompts in this guide are meant to inspire you, but ultimately they will need to be tweaked
to help you with your specific work.
To get started, jump to the section that best matches your role. Use the role-specific suggested prompts as
inspiration to help you unlock a new and powerful way of working.
Next, just look for these features and learn how you can get started with each one by visiting
g.co/gemini/features:
Help me write (Google Docs)
Help me write (Gmail)
Help me organize (Google Sheets)
Create image with Gemini (Google Slides)
Create background images (Google Meet)
gemini.google.com (with Google Workspace enterprise-grade security and privacy)
6
Customer service
As a customer service professional, you strive to
deliver service that’s effortlessly efficient, consistently
delightful, and powered by a proactive, helpful
team. This section provides you with simple ways
to integrate prompts in your daily tasks. Quickly
build standardized communication frameworks,
personalized communications, new training materials,
and more — all using Gemini for Google Workspace.
Getting started
First, review the general prompt-writing tips on page 2 and the Prompting 101 section at the beginning of
this guide.
Each prompt below is presented with an accompanying scenario to serve as inspiration for how you can
collaborate with Gemini for Workspace. The prompt iteration example illustrates how you can continue to write
prompts to build on the initial generated response. We also provide examples of how different customer service
roles can use Gemini for Workspace. You can adjust each prompt to accomplish common tasks and refine the
generated output.
Prompt iteration example
You’re a customer service representative, and you’re responsible for responding directly to customer inquiries
and concerns. You just received an email from a customer who received damaged goods. You open a new
Google Doc and click on Help me write to prompt Gemini in Docs. Type the following:
Help me craft an empathetic email response. I am a customer service representative, and I need to
create a response to a customer complaint. The customer ordered a pair of headphones that arrived
damaged. They’ve already contacted us via email and provided pictures of the damage. I’ve offered
a replacement, but they’re requesting an expedited shipping option that isn’t typically included with
their order. Include a paragraph that acknowledges their frustration and three bullet points with
potential resolutions. (Gemini in Docs)
Persona •
Task •
Context •
Gemini in Docs: [Drafts email copy]
•
Format
7
Gemini in Docs
You like the email that Gemini in Docs created so you select Insert. But you want to brainstorm ways to resolve
the issue without offering expedited shipping. You prompt by selecting Help me write. You type:
Suggest 10 alternative options in place of expedited shipping to resolve the customer’s frustration
about receiving the damaged package. (Gemini in Docs)
Gemini in Docs: [List of 10 alternative solutions]
Gemini in Docs
These 10 suggestions are helpful. You click Insert to add the text into your draft.
8
Prompt guide
Customer Service Manager or Representative
Use case: Standardize communication frameworks
You’re a customer service team manager. Your team has expanded, and you need to create scalable resources
to standardize your communication across the team. You open a new Google Doc. You want to brainstorm, so
you ask Gemini in Docs for help. You select Help me write and type:
Draft templates for three different types of customer communication. Create a template for apology
emails, order confirmation messages, and thank you notes for loyal customers. Keep each template to
one paragraph and use a friendly tone. (Gemini in Docs)
The suggested templates offer a great starting point for you to begin editing and adding in a few more elements
consistent with your company’s brand and policies. You select Insert. Now you want to create a document that
outlines your team’s communication best practices to be used for onboarding. You open a new Google Doc and
prompt Gemini in Docs. You type:
Craft a list of customer communication best practices that can be used to train new team members.
Outline three sections including how to handle happy customer inquiries, neutral customer inquiries, and
dissatisfied customer inquiries. (Gemini in Docs)
You also want to support the team with standardized language that they can use when interacting with
customers on phone calls. You want to brainstorm, so you open gemini.google.com and type:
I am a [customer service manager]. I am trying to create standardized language that the team can
use when interacting with customers on phone calls. Generate templates for common call openings,
greetings, and closures for a customer service representative at a retail store. These templates should
allow for personalization with customer details. The goal is to ensure consistency and professionalism
while allowing for differentiation with specific customer information. (gemini.google.com)
Use case: Improve customer service
You’ve noticed an uptick in customer complaints. You need to collaborate across departments to understand
how you can address recurring issues. You start with an email to the other team leads. You prompt Gemini in
Gmail by selecting Help me write. You type:
Draft an email to my colleagues proposing a meeting to discuss customer experience improvement
initiatives. Request that marketing, sales, and product stakeholders meet in the next week to get a clear
sense of roles and responsibilities. (Gemini in Gmail)
9
You lightly copy edit the email and send it to your colleagues. Now that you’ve sent the initial email, you want to
create a spreadsheet that you can use to track progress on this cross-departmental initiative. You open Google
Sheets and prompt Gemini in Sheets by selecting Help me organize. You type:
Create a table to track the progress and impact of different customer experience improvement tactics
using relevant metrics including support ticket volume and priority level (high, medium, low).
(Gemini in Sheets)
You see a solid spreadsheet template with the categories you asked for already formatted. Now you just need to
fill in specific details.
Customer Support Specialist
Use case: Enable customer self-service
As a customer support specialist, your team gets a lot of emails with questions about your return policy.
Customer feedback has consistently said your guidelines are unclear. You open a Google Doc that states the
return, refund, and store credit policies. You prompt Gemini in Docs by selecting Help me write. You type:
Summarize this content to write a clear and concise product return policy and outline 5 steps for
customers to take in sequential order. (Gemini Docs)
You like how simple the steps are. You repeat the process for your refund policy and store credit policy. Now,
you want to use the newly simplified content to create a blog post for customers. This blog post will outline your
return, refund, and store credit policies. Using your Google Doc with the newly written guidance, you prompt
Gemini in Google Docs. You type:
Take this content and turn it into a short blog with the title “Resolve Common Issues Without Agent
Assistance.” Have separate sections for our return policy, our refund policy, and our store credit policy.
(Gemini in Docs)
Now you want to create an email template that the team can use when they receive customer questions around
these three areas. You open a new Google Doc and prompt Gemini in Docs. You type:
Draft an email template to a customer that highlights self-service resources [blog link] for [support
issues]. Thank the customer for their business and assure them of our commitment to meeting their
needs. (Gemini in Docs)
10
Use case: Voice of the customer research
Your new company policy is that you will email every dissatisfied customer to attempt to make things right.
You open an email that includes a customer complaint. You prompt Gemini in Gmail by selecting Help me
write. You type:
Request a follow-up conversation on [date] at [time] with this customer who provided negative feedback
to understand their concern and offer resolutions. Include example solutions. (Gemini in Gmail)
The drafted response is a nice start, but the language is a little too direct in response to a complaint. You iterate
by prompting Gemini in Gmail using Refine > Elaborate. Next, you want to create a short survey that you can
send after each follow-up call you have with a customer to gauge how helpful the call was in addressing their
needs. You open a new Google Doc and prompt Gemini in Docs. You type:
Create five different questions to customers who have just spoken to an agent on the phone. Questions
should gauge how effective the call was, if the customer’s concern was addressed, and if they would
recommend our business to others. (Gemini in Docs)
Client Services Coordinator
Use case: Engage with customers
You’ve made a lot of progress in updating your policies and want to get feedback on the changes from your
most loyal customers. You plan to host a listening tour to engage with them. You open Gmail and prompt Gemini
in Gmail. You select Help me write and type:
Write an email inviting my most loyal customers to a feedback session next week at [location] on [date] at
[time] about our updated [policies]. (Gemini in Gmail)
The listening tour has ended, and you’ve received follow-up emails from attendees. You want help responding to
each, so you prompt Gemini in Gmail. You type:
Write a thank you note, personalized for [customer name] that thanks them for their attendance at
the feedback session and explains how we will use feedback to improve our policies. (Gemini in Gmail)
Use case: Prepare for client meetings
You need to prepare for a meeting with an important customer. Their account is new to you, as is their industry
and line of business. You need help researching, so you open gemini.google.com and you type:
Write five questions I can use to research a company in the [industry] industry to understand the biggest
challenges they face and prepare for the first meeting. (gemini.google.com)
11
Using these questions, you continue your research with follow-up questions in your conversation with Gemini at
gemini.google.com. You compile notes and findings into a Google Doc.
You have pages of notes, so you want to create an easy-to-digest summary for yourself. You prompt Gemini in
Docs. You type:
Summarize findings about [industry] from this content and create talking points to discuss with the client.
(Gemini in Docs)
Now you feel ready to meet with the customer for the first time. You’re preparing to send your first introduction
email. You open Gmail and prompt Gemini in Gmail. You select Help me write and you type:
Write an email introducing me as the client services coordinator for [account]. Ask my customer for a
meeting about [topic], requesting dates and times in the next two weeks. (Gemini in Gmail)
12
Executives and
entrepreneurs
As an executive, your time is incredibly constrained
as you chart the course for your organization. Every
decision you make impacts growth, innovation, and
the overall trajectory of your business. Understanding
your market, staying ahead of trends, and making
informed, strategic calls is paramount, and so is
getting urgent tasks done while you’re on the go.
This section introduces you to the power of AI-generated prompts designed to streamline your decision-making,
help improve business outcomes, and assist you in getting your tasks done quickly — even if you’re not at your
desk. Discover how Gemini for Google Workspace can help you unlock deep insights, foster collaboration, and
propel your organization to new heights.
Getting started
First, review the general prompt-writing tips on page 2 and the Prompting 101 section at the beginning of this guide.
Each prompt below is presented with an accompanying scenario to serve as inspiration for how you can collaborate
with Gemini for Workspace. The prompt iteration example illustrates how you can continue to write prompts to build
on the initial generated response. We also provide examples of how different leadership roles can use Gemini for
Workspace. You can adjust each prompt to accomplish common tasks and refine the generated output.
Prompt iteration example
You are an executive about to board a long flight, and you just received an invitation for the next board meeting with
an agenda. You have a couple of comments, and you want to propose adding a few topics to the agenda. You open
Gmail, and you prompt Gemini in Gmail. You type:
Draft an email 15 minutes to [urgent topics]. (Gemini in Gmail)
confirming that I will be at the board meeting. Ask if we can adjust the agenda to give
Persona •
Task •
Context •
Format
•
Gemini in Gmail: [Drafts an email]
13
Gemini in Gmail
The email looks good, but you want to make sure the tone is as formal as possible. You select Refine > Formalize.
Gemini in Gmail: [Formalizes tone]
Gemini in Gmail
You read the email, and select Insert. Before sending it, you make a light edit to thank the team for keeping you on
track while traveling.
14
Prompt guide
Chief Operating Officer
Use case: Prepare employee communications
You’re hosting a quarterly town hall meeting with the entire company. There’s been a lot of positive progress and
momentum this quarter, but you’re worried that multiple teams have low morale after unforeseen setbacks. You
want to brainstorm and practice how you will respond to potentially tough questions. You open gemini.google.com,
and you type:
I’m the COO of a mid-sized company. I am hosting a quarterly town hall meeting with the entire company.
There has been a lot of positive progress and momentum this quarter, but I am worried that multiple teams
have low morale due to some unforeseen setbacks. I want to brainstorm and practice how I will respond to
potentially tough questions. Help me write challenging questions that employees may ask at the upcoming
town hall about our earnings, leadership changes, and vision of the company. Generate potential answers
for each question that use a confident but firm tone. (gemini.google.com)
The questions and suggested answers are helpful for your preparation phase. Now, you want to gather ideas on how
you can respond empathetically to questions, especially in uncertain times. You prompt again. You type:
These questions and suggested answers are helpful in my preparation phase. Now, I want to gather ideas
on how I can respond empathetically to questions, especially in uncertain times. Use a confident and
reassuring tone to generate responses that acknowledge the concern and let the employees know that
we are striving to do our best for the entire company. (gemini.google.com)
You want to work backwards from these questions to figure out how you can write uplifting remarks to open the town
hall. You decide to brainstorm with Gemini in Docs. You open a new Google Doc and select Help me write. You type:
Help me write two uplifting paragraphs for employees who have just finished a challenging quarter.
Acknowledge [difficulties] and emphasize [positives] for the upcoming quarter. Use a tone that is
motivating, optimistic, and fosters a sense of unity and collaboration. (Gemini in Docs)
Use case: Streamline responses on the go
Your plans have suddenly changed as you’re managing an urgent task. You can’t attend a meeting, and you just need
to ensure the team has answers on a few key items. You open Gmail and use a voice command to prompt Gemini in
Gmail. You say:
Draft an email to [project lead] letting them know I will not be in the meeting due to an urgent matter.
Ask them to take detailed notes and to ensure the team arrives at a decision on [key topic] in addition
to assigning ownership of the postmortem report to [colleague]. (Gemini in Gmail)
15
Chief Marketing Officer
Use case: Brainstorm content and thought leadership
You just came out of a check-in with your social media team leads. You took a lot of notes in a Google Doc about
what resonates with your audience, trending topics, target audience data, and keywords that are effective in driving
engagement with your brand. You want to brainstorm potential thought leadership pieces using these insights. You
prompt Gemini in Docs within your existing Google Doc by selecting Help me write. You type:
Generate a list of four relevant and engaging thought leadership blog post ideas for [company] based on
trending topics, target audience analysis, and brand keywords. (Gemini in Docs)
During the same conversation, the team discussed launching a new brand campaign. You know that your customers
value your reliable and unique services, and your company has a long history of delivering for customers. You need
help getting started with ideas on a new campaign line. You open a new Google Doc and select Help me write.
You type:
Generate three options for a new slogan emphasizing reliability, innovation, and a long history of
popularity for [company]. (Gemini in Docs)
The slogans are helpful to get you started with the creative process. You have upcoming events that could be the
perfect place to test elements of a new campaign. You want to mock up ideas for booth graphics for your events
team. You open a new presentation in Google Slides and select Create image with Gemini. You type:
Create an image of a trade show booth using orange and blue colors. The booth should be modern and
showcase interactive computer stations. (Gemini in Slides)
Use case: Conduct competitive analysis
Your team is considering expanding into a new line of business. This is a new area for you, and you want to quickly
gain insight into what this would mean for the business. You decide to do research. You go to gemini.google.com,
and you type:
I am a CMO conducting a competitive analysis. My company is considering expanding into [a new line of
business]. Generate a list of the top five competitors in the [industry] industry and include their pricing,
strengths, weaknesses, and target audience. (gemini.google.com)
After going deeper in your research, you decide to create a fictitious five-year strategy to see what this could look like
for the company. You type:
Okay, I am going to try to convince my CEO that we should expand into [line of business]. Draft a concise,
competitive strategy for the next five years for the [industry] industry across North America markets with
goals, strategies, and tactics. (gemini.google.com)
16
Chief Technology Officer
Use case: Summarize emerging technology trends
You need to catch up on emerging technology trends as the landscape is shifting very quickly. You open
gemini.google.com, and you type:
I am the CTO of [company] in [industry]. I want to understand emerging technology trends. Summarize
the top five emerging technologies with the most significant potential impact on [industry]. For each
technology, list its potential benefits and challenges, and suggest how it could impact [company] in the
next two to three years. (gemini.google.com)
The summary provided is a useful starting point for your initial research. You want to dig deeper on specific topics,
so you continue the conversation by typing:
Recommend three areas where [my organization] can take proactive steps to stay ahead of the curve on
[specific areas]. (gemini.google.com)
Chief Information Officer
Use case: Develop technical communications
Your team just provided a lengthy technical report on your security posture and key vulnerabilities. You need to
address this immediately with the CEO, but you know a multi-page report is too much to digest at this time. You open
the Google Doc with the full report, and you prompt Gemini in Docs by selecting Help me write. You type:
Summarize the key findings and implications of this report for [audience]. Focus on the main
[vulnerabilities] identified and the recommended actions to address them. Use a formal tone.
(Gemini in Docs)
The summary is helpful and provides the right level of detail for your CEO. You make light edits and put it at the top
of the report as an executive summary. Now, you need to send an email to the CEO to schedule a meeting to discuss.
You open Gmail and prompt Gemini in Gmail by selecting Help me write. You type:
Help me write an email to my CEO requesting a 30-minute meeting next week to discuss our upcoming
[IT changes]. Include considerations for scalability, security, and data management. (Gemini in Gmail)
Use case: Track IT assets
Your company needs a quick way to track software access for new hires. You need a spreadsheet, so you open
Google Sheets and you select Help me organize. Then you type:
Create a tracker of software licenses for employees and include columns for license types, usage rights,
and renewal dates. (Gemini in Sheets)
17
Chief Human Resources Officer
Use case: Demonstrate employee appreciation
You want to set up a new program to help everyone feel included, appreciated, and acknowledged across the
organization. But with a company this big, you want to be thoughtful in your approach. You want to brainstorm,
so you open a new Google Doc and prompt Gemini in Docs. You type:
Brainstorm 10 employee appreciation ideas based on company culture of [type] and diverse employee
interests such as cooking, gardening, sports, reading, and traveling. (Gemini in Docs)
Gemini in Docs kick-starts your creativity, and now you have ideas for employee interest clubs and events. You also
want to ensure your leadership team is regularly encouraging managers to recognize talent on their teams, so you
create email templates they can use as inspiration. You prompt Gemini in Docs by selecting Help me write, and
you type:
Draft an email template that thanks [employee] for their hard work and [recent accomplishments]. Offer
them an extra perk for their dedication, such as a coffee gift card. Use an upbeat and professional tone.
(Gemini in Docs)
Use case: Assess employee satisfaction
You’re concerned that your team has been overwhelmed lately. Ahead of your call with your direct reports, you
want to draft an anonymous survey that allows people to openly and honestly assess how they are feeling. To draft
questions, you open a new Google Doc and prompt Gemini in Docs by selecting Help me write. You type:
Draft an anonymous employee satisfaction survey with questions and answer options that touch upon
key areas like workload, work-life balance, compensation, and career growth opportunities. Ensure the
questions are clear, concise, and avoid leading answers. (Gemini in Docs)
You received feedback from 15 senior leaders, and you’ve gathered all of the anonymous results in a Google Doc.
You want to create a summary that you can use in your next call. You prompt Gemini in Docs by selecting Help me
write. You type:
Summarize the results of the employee feedback to identify key themes. (Gemini in Docs)
Founder or Entrepreneur
Use case: Develop a competitive analysis
You’re a founder of a startup, and your online business is gaining traction. You have always dreamed of opening a
brick-and-mortar store, and now might be the perfect time. You want a thought partner to help you better understand
the current landscape. You open gemini.google.com, and you type:
I am a founder of a startup. I am considering opening a brick-and-mortar store. Conduct an analysis
into the competitive landscape focusing on [focus area]. Provide the strengths and weaknesses of [key
competitors] in this area, including their specific strategies, tactics, and results. Identify actionable
18
insights and recommendations for how [my company] can improve its approach and gain a competitive
advantage. (gemini.google.com)
You gathered useful information from your discussion with Gemini at gemini.google.com. You want to go deeper in
your brainstorming around two competitors in particular. You type:
Generate a competitive analysis of [company] versus [competitor] within the current market landscape.
(gemini.google.com)
You export your findings to a new Google Doc.
Use case: Conduct fundraising and investor relations
You’re ready to reach out to potential investors to make your brick-and-mortar store a reality. You want help getting
started on an email to investors, so in the same Google Doc with all of your notes and research, you prompt Gemini in
Docs by selecting Help me write. You type:
Draft a personalized email template to potential investors, highlighting [company’s] unique value
proposition and recent progress on [initiatives]. Request a time to meet to discuss opportunities to
collaborate in the next month. (Gemini in Docs)
The email template gives you a starting place. You tweak the draft and continue to add a few personal touches before
sending the email to the potential investors. After a successful meeting with them a month later, you want to draft a
thank you message. You open your Google Doc with the meeting transcript and notes. You prompt Gemini in Docs to
help you write an email draft. You type:
Draft an email thanking a potential investor for the call and ask for time to schedule a follow-up meeting
to address [questions and concerns]. (Gemini in Docs)
Use case: Manage time off policies and tracking
You have a lengthy handbook detailing all of your company’s policies and procedures. You want to make the time-off
request policy easily digestible for new hires. You open the Google Doc with the handbook. You prompt Gemini in
Docs by selecting Help me write. You type:
Generate a step-by-step checklist summarizing the company’s time-off request policy. Ensure it is written
in plain language and easy for employees to understand. (Gemini in Docs)
You need a quick way to track staffing each week since many of your employees are shift-based. You open Google
Sheets and click Help me organize. You type:
Create a table that tracks weekly staffing. Create columns for date, name, shift (AM or PM), and notes.
(Gemini in Sheets)
19
Human resources
As an HR professional, you’re the backbone of your
organization and you deal with a large volume of
confidential and sensitive information. You shape
company culture, find and nurture talent, and ensure
a positive employee experience. That’s no small feat.
This section provides you with simple ways to integrate
prompts in your day-to-day tasks.
Learning to write effective prompts will help improve
your productivity and streamline your everyday tasks,
giving you more time to focus on your most pressing
tasks. Kick-start recruiting, onboarding, fostering a
culture of belonging, and more — all using Gemini for
Google Workspace. For CHRO use cases, visit the
Executives and entrepreneurs section of this guide.
Getting started
First, review the general prompt-writing tips on page 2 and the Prompting 101 section at the beginning of this guide.
Each prompt below is presented with an accompanying scenario to serve as inspiration for how you can collaborate
with Gemini for Workspace. The prompt iteration example illustrates how you can continue to write prompts to build
on the initial generated response. We also provide examples of how different HR roles can use Gemini for Workspace.
You can adjust each prompt to accomplish common tasks and refine the generated output.
Prompt iteration example
You’re an HR manager working on building a presentation script for an employee meeting. You have a Google
Doc full of notes, bullet points, and topics that you would like to cover. You begin by opening your Google Doc
with notes, and you use the following prompts for Gemini in Docs.
and •
I am an HR manager, I am developing a script for my presentation for new hires. I need to create the
script for an onboarding presentation about our company’s commitment to employee development and
well-being. Help me draft talking points that showcase why employee mentorship and development are
core values for our company. (Gemini in Docs)
Persona •
Task •
Context •
Format
Gemini in Docs: [Drafts talking points]
20
Gemini in Docs
You like what Gemini in Docs created, so you select Insert. Now, you want to add more targeted talking points.
In the Google Doc, you highlight the notes related to training and certification programs and mentorship
opportunities. You type:
Add four talking points our employees’ development. opportunities. (Gemini in Docs)
for a new section of the presentation script that explains how we support
Mention our training and certification programs and mentorship
21
Gemini in Docs
Gemini in Docs: [Adds talking points]
You select Insert. Now, you need ideas on how to frame the ending of the script. You highlight your notes on
expected team behaviors in the Google Doc and you prompt Gemini in Docs with the following:
Write a strong closing statement about our expectation that everyone contributes to a respectful and
welcoming workplace. Use a professional tone. (Gemini in Docs)
Gemini in Docs
Gemini in Docs: [Adds talking point]
The generated content has given you a head start on your script. You add in a few more details and then you’re
ready to create a draft of the Google Slides that will accompany your talking points.
22
Prompt guide
Recruiter
Use case: Manage the recruiting process
The business is growing, and you have a large hiring effort underway. First, you want to brainstorm with Gemini
for Workspace to see how the company can better manage the recruiting process. You open the team’s
“Recruiting Strategies” Google Doc, which includes notes on recruiting strategies and outlets in addition to
email and message templates for cold outreach to candidates from LinkedIn and other sources. You begin with
the following prompt using Gemini in Docs by selecting Help me write. You type:
Create a list of strategies our recruiters can use to improve our existing recruiting process and identify
potential job candidates. (Gemini in Docs)
After successfully creating a short recommendation for leadership on how the team will improve existing
recruiting processes, the team receives guidance for an urgent job opening for a content marketing manager
with experience in B2B and B2C content creation, with a minimum of five years of experience, and a portfolio of
writing examples. You open a new Google Doc and prompt Gemini in Docs with the following:
I am opening a new job position on the marketing team. Write a compelling role description for a content
marketing manager. Highlight key responsibilities [insert] and requirements including B2B and B2C content
creation, a minimum of five years experience, and a portfolio of writing examples. (Gemini in Docs)
Gemini in Docs generates a job description. After reviewing and making slight adjustments, you highlight the text
and prompt:
Suggest ways to update [job description] and provide suggestions to make it more compelling for
[audience]. (Gemini in Docs)
Use case: Manage the interview process
Now, you want to prepare questions for phone screen interviews. The job descriptions have been approved and
posted online. You decide to prepare by visiting gemini.google.com. You type:
I am a recruiter, and I am preparing for candidate interviews. Write a list of 20 open-ended interview
questions for [open role URL] that I can use to screen candidates. (gemini.google.com)
After the interview, you have one Google Doc full of notes from each candidate conversation. Using this Google
Doc, you prompt Gemini in Docs. You type:
Summarize the interview notes and generate a shortlist of top candidates for the [position].
(Gemini in Docs)
23
In the same Google Doc, you now want to summarize your findings on each candidate for the hiring manager.
You prompt Gemini in Docs by selecting Help me write. You type:
Generate an email to the hiring manager with a summary of [candidates]. (Gemini in Docs)
Use case: Candidate communication
The team has made its hiring decisions. You open the Google Doc with notes on each candidate. You prompt
Gemini in Docs by selecting Help me write. You type:
I am writing an email to job candidates that just finished the interview process. Create a template for
an offer letter for the [selected candidate] for the [position] with a request to schedule a call to discuss
benefits, compensation, and start date. (Gemini in Docs)
Now, you want to generate personalized, empathetic email copy to send to the job candidates who will not
receive an offer. You prompt Gemini in Docs by selecting Help me write. You type:
I am writing an email to job candidates who finished the interview process, but who were not selected.
Help me write a rejection letter for [candidate] for the [position]. Use an empathetic tone. (Gemini in Docs)
HR Manager
Use case: Onboard employees
You’re an HR manager. The recruiters have just filled the company’s two open roles. Now, you’re in charge of
ensuring the candidates have a smooth onboarding experience. You need help in structuring information for the
new hires, so you open Google Sheets and prompt Gemini in Sheets by selecting Help me organize. You type:
Create a table that outlines a new employee’s first-week schedule, including key meetings, training
sessions, and introductions. Provide a column for key contacts and priority level (low, medium, high)
for each activity. (Gemini in Sheets)
Gemini in Sheets returns a formatted Google Sheet that you can now fill in with key contacts, meetings, and activities.
The conditional formatting makes it easy for you to sort tasks by priority level with color-coded visual cues. Next, you
need to create ways for the team to bond. You open a new Google Doc and prompt Gemini in Docs by selecting Help
me write. You type:
Design a team-bonding activity, such as an office scavenger hunt, to have team members work together
during their team meeting. (Gemini in Docs)
24
Gemini in Docs provides suggestions that get you brainstorming about the scavenger hunt. You tweak the outputs
and get it approved by the team lead. Now, you need to communicate with the new hires to give them information
about their first day when they will meet the team. You open Gmail and prompt Gemini in Gmail by selecting Help
me write. You type:
Draft an email to the new employees on the [team] to meet the rest of their team and explain the team-building
purposes of the meeting. (Gemini in Gmail)
Use case: Communicate key findings and draft follow-up surveys
Now that you’ve finished onboarding new employees, you need to focus on ensuring that the latest company
research data is easily understood by leadership. You’re committed to creating a welcoming environment for all
employees where they can develop their skills. You open the Google Doc with the finalized report. You prompt
Gemini in Docs by selecting Help me write. You type:
Draft an email to senior leadership that summarizes the key findings from our [report]. Include a short
introductory paragraph with bullet points on the most important findings. (Gemini in Docs)
Gemini in Docs returns a summary with bullet points. You edit it and then use it to email the leadership team.
As a follow-up action, you want to understand how changes made to company policies impact the employee
experience. You open Gemini in Docs to begin drafting a survey. You select Help me write and type:
Draft an anonymous employee survey with questions and answer options to monitor company progress
on [topics]. (Gemini in Docs)
25
Marketing
As a marketing professional, you’re the creative force
behind captivating campaigns, brand experiences,
lead generation, and more. You understand the power
of data-driven insights, compelling messaging, and
connecting with your audience on a deeper level.
This section provides you with simple ways to integrate
prompts in your day-to-day tasks. Learning to write
effective prompts will help improve your productivity
and streamline your everyday tasks, giving you back
the time you need to focus on your more strategic
work. Discover how to write prompts in a way that will
help unlock new levels of creativity, automate insights,
and craft campaigns that resonate — all using Gemini
for Google Workspace. For CMO use cases, visit the
Executives and entrepreneurs section of the guide.
Getting started
First, review the general prompt-writing tips on page 2 and the Prompting 101 section at the beginning of
this guide.
Each prompt below is presented with an accompanying scenario to serve as inspiration for how you can
collaborate with Gemini for Workspace. The prompt iteration example illustrates how you can continue to
write prompts to build on the initial generated response. We also provide examples of how different marketing
roles can use Gemini for Workspace. You can adjust each prompt to accomplish common tasks and refine the
generated output.
Prompt iteration example
You own your own consulting business and are often hired to function as a brand manager for your clients.
You help businesses in a variety of industries. Your customer is getting ready to launch a coffee shop and video
game cafe, and you need to kick-start the creative process by developing a visual identity. You want to ideate
and provide early thoughts to the rest of the team. You decide to chat with Gemini at gemini.google.com.
You type:
Generate ideas for a creative and eye-catching logo a video game cafe. Generate a logo considering the following:
for my new business, a coffee shop combined with
26
Dual Concept: The logo needs to clearly signal both the coffee and gaming aspects of the business
without being too cluttered.
Target Audience: Appeal to a wide range of gamers (casual and enthusiast), as well as coffee lovers
seeking a unique hangout spot.
•
Style Options: I’m open to these approaches — let’s get a few examples in each of these three styles
to compare: Modern and Playful: Bold colors, fun graphics, maybe a pixel art aesthetic. Retro-Cool:
Think classic arcade style — chunky lettering, neon color inspiration. Sleek and Minimalist: Clean lines,
geometric shapes, a more subtle nod to both themes. (gemini.google.com)
Persona •
Task •
Context •
Format
gemini.google.com
You like the retro-cool options. You continue your conversation and you type:
I like the retro-cool options. Can you provide three more in that same style? (gemini.google.com)
gemini.google.com
27
Now that you have a sense of what the logo could look like, you want to brainstorm names. You type:
Write a tagline and 10 potential names for the business to go with these logos. (gemini.google.com)
gemini.google.com
Prompt guide
Brand Manager
Use case: Conduct market research and identify trends
The landscape in your industry is rapidly changing and you need to conduct market research to better identify
and understand emerging trends. You go to gemini.google.com, and you type:
I need to do market research on [industry] industry to identify new trends. Use [URLs] to uncover emerging
trends and shifting consumer preferences. (gemini.google.com)
After completing your research, you and the team have updated your brand campaign to include new messaging
that you want to A/B test. You decide to generate multiple variations of ad copy. You go to gemini.google.com
and type:
I need to A/B test new messaging. Here is our messaging: [messaging]. Generate three different variations
of ad copy. (gemini.google.com)
28
Use case: Create and manage content and distribution
Another customer has some exciting leadership changes underway. You need to create content to shape the
brand narrative of the company as it enters its next era. You open a Google Doc to get started on a blog draft.
You prompt Gemini in Docs by selecting Help me write. You type:
Create a blog draft announcing that [name] is joining [company] as [position]. [Share two or three
details from their bio, such as their previous position and company, their involvement in professional
organizations, etc.] (Gemini in Docs)
You also want a way to efficiently track how and where this content is amplified, so you open Google Sheets.
You prompt Gemini in Sheets by selecting Help me organize. You type:
Create a project tracker for content amplification and include columns for channel, owner, URL, and
priority level (low, medium, high). (Gemini in Sheets)
Digital Marketing Manager
Use case: Draft customer acquisition communications
Email is one of your company’s main channels of direct communication with prospects and customers. You want
help getting started with copy for a new email campaign. You open a new Google Doc, and you prompt Gemini in
Docs by selecting Help me write. You type:
Write three different email subject lines that reference [audience segments] and our [product]. Make them
catchy but professional. (Gemini in Docs)
Now you want to share the proposed email subject lines with the copywriting team. You open Gmail, and you
select Help me write. You type:
Help me write an email proposing [suggested email subject lines] to the copywriting team. Keep the email
short and simple and request feedback by the end of week. Thank them for their help. (Gemini in Gmail)
Use case: Generate inbound marketing campaigns
The team just created a new ebook on best practices for executives using our new solution. You’re creating a
landing page to house the gated asset, and you need engaging copy. You open a new Google Doc and select
Help me write. You type:
Create compelling copy for a landing page promoting a new [ebook/webinar/free trial and details]
designed for an executive target audience. Highlight key benefits and encourage conversions with
persuasive calls to action. (Gemini in Docs)
29
The webpage launched, and you’re now running an inbound marketing campaign. You need to nurture the leads
that downloaded your latest ebook. You open a new Google Doc, and you prompt Gemini in Docs by selecting
Help me write. You type:
Generate copy for a sequence of five automated emails to nurture leads after they download the ebook
on [topic]. Personalize emails with [name] and encourage further engagement [with other valuable
resources or offers]. (Gemini in Docs)
Content Marketing Manager
Use case: Generate inspiration for your blog
You work for a travel company as the content marketing manager for the company’s blog channel. You need
to kick-start the brainstorming process for a new blog post. You decide to gather ideas by collaborating with
Gemini at gemini.google.com. You type:
I need blog post topics that would be interesting for people passionate about travel and the tourism
industry. Here’s what I want you to focus on: Make the topics unique. There are lots of tourism blogs out
there — let’s come up with fresh angles that would stand out. Keep the topics relevant. Tap into current
trends or recent challenges/innovations within the tourism industry when brainstorming. I’d like each topic
to include:
Target audience: Who would this topic specifically appeal to?
Content outline: A few bullet points with the main ideas the blog post would discuss.
Call to action: Suggest one way to engage the reader at the end of the post. (gemini.google.com)
You love the initial ideas you were able to create. You also need to focus on generating creative imagery to
accompany the copy in the blog. You open a new Google Slide and you prompt Gemini in Slides by selecting
Create image with Gemini. You type:
Create an image of a plane flying above the clouds over mountains and rivers during sunrise that I can use
in the marketing campaign to promote my travel company. (Gemini in Slides)
30
Use case: Create social media posts
You’re focused on creating content that is optimized for social media channels. You need to gather ideas for
different content targeted to distinct audiences. You open a new Google Doc and prompt Gemini in Docs by
selecting Help me write. You type:
Write three engaging social media posts about [product/service/topic] that would appeal to [target
audience]. Keep each social media post to two sentences and include a call to action to visit [our website].
(Gemini in Docs)
You also need to craft social media posts to drive registration for an upcoming event targeting recent grads.
You open a new Google Doc and you prompt Gemini in Docs by selecting Help me write. You type:
Create a social media post promoting our upcoming [event name]. Include attention-grabbing language
and relevant hashtags for [audience]. (Gemini in Docs)
Use case: Create a strategic marketing plan
Your company is launching a new app. You need a robust marketing plan, but you want ideas to get started.
You chat with Gemini by visiting gemini.google.com. You type:
I’m developing a marketing plan for a new app that provides [functionality]. My target audience is
[audience]. Help me create a plan with a focus on [marketing channels]. Here’s what I’d like you to cover:
competitor analysis, ideal marketing channel mix with rationale, budget recommendations, key messaging
ideas, and proposed campaign timeline with KPIs. (gemini.google.com)
The responses from your chat are helpful in shaping your marketing plan. While you finalize all of the details, you
need to get the high-level details to your CMO. You open Gmail and prompt Gemini in Gmail by selecting Help
me write. You type:
Draft an email to the CMO telling them that I will provide a one-pager with a strategic marketing plan for
the new app launch project by [date] and it will include an executive summary, overview of the competitive
landscape, top marketing channels and the target demographic for all South American markets.
(Gemini in Gmail)
31
Project management
As the conductor of complex, ever-evolving projects,
your mission is to navigate timelines, coordinate
teams, and ensure your programs deliver the
intended impact.
This section introduces you to the power of Gemini
for Google Workspace to help you learn the basics
of prompting and optimize your project management
workflow. Get ready to realize the efficiency, insight,
and proactive problem-solving that will help elevate
your project outcomes using Gemini for Workspace.
Getting started
First, review the general prompt-writing tips on page 2 and the Prompting 101 section at the beginning of
this guide.
Each prompt below is presented with an accompanying scenario to serve as inspiration for how you can
collaborate with Gemini for Workspace. The prompt iteration example illustrates how you can continue to
write prompts to build on the initial generated response. You can continue to write prompts to build on the
initial generated response, and you can adjust each prompt to accomplish common tasks and refine the
generated output.
Prompt iteration example
Your team just completed the registration form for a new website, and now you need to generate some User
Acceptance Tests (UATs). To start a draft, you visit gemini.google.com and type:
Create a table with 10 User Acceptance Tests (UAT) (gemini.google.com)
•
Persona •
Task •
Context •
Format
for the latest website registration form.
32
gemini.google.com
You think the results are a helpful starting point, so you export the results to a Google Sheet before drafting an
email to your colleague who is running the UATs. You want to explain what they need to do. You continue your
conversation with Gemini at gemini.google.com. You type:
to [my colleague] who is running this UAT and explain what they need to do next.
Draft an email (gemini.google.com)
gemini.google.com
The drafted email provides a helpful starting point, so you export the results to Gmail, and you make edits
directly before sending the message to your colleague.
33
Prompt guide
Project Manager
Use case: Report on project status
You just had a lengthy call with all of your project stakeholders and now you want to summarize what was
discussed and follow up with assigned action items. In the Google Doc with the meeting transcript, you prompt
Gemini in Docs by selecting Help me write. You type:
Summarize this call transcript in a short paragraph. In bullet points, highlight the action items, decisions
made, and owners for each item based off of [call transcript]. (Gemini in Docs)
You need to update your manager based on the activity from the last call. You want to templatize how your
project status updates are delivered. You open a new Google Doc, and you prompt Gemini in Docs by selecting
Help me write. You type:
Draft a project status update email template to send to my manager. Include sections for a summary of
key accomplishments this week, any challenges faced, and the top three priorities for next week.
(Gemini in Docs)
The team just hit its key milestones an entire week early. It’s been a challenging project, so you want
to gather everyone to celebrate together. You open Gmail and prompt Gemini in Gmail by selecting Help me
write. You type:
Write an invitation for a team lunch to celebrate the progress made on a project and include [date, time,
and location]. Thank them for all of their hard work and acknowledge that this has been a challenging
project. (Gemini in Gmail)
Use case: Create a project retrospective
You’ve just wrapped the project, and your senior leadership team needs a project retrospective. To kick-start
the process of gathering feedback from across the broader team, you open a Google Doc and prompt Gemini in
Docs by selecting Help me write. You type:
I need to write a report detailing the successes, failures, and lessons learned from [project]. Draft a
list of 20 questions to guide a cross-team process investigation. Include questions to uncover what
worked, what didn’t, specific process breakdowns, technical issues, communication gaps, or any
other potential contributing factors to the problem or success of the project. (Gemini in Docs)
34
The questions provided by Gemini in Docs give you a great starting place. You edit them before sharing the
Google Doc with the team for their input. After you gather everyone’s feedback in the Google Doc, you want
help structuring the report. You prompt Gemini in Docs by selecting Help me write. You type:
Summarize this document in two paragraphs. Include high-level information about the project’s goals,
the main contributors, what the outcomes of the project were, and any key successes or failures.
(Gemini in Docs)
Use case: Develop an issue tracker and related communications
You need to create a project issue tracker to keep track of risks and solve them in a timely manner. You want to
create a template quickly, so you open a new Google Sheet and prompt Gemini in Sheets by selecting Help me
organize. You type:
Create a spreadsheet to track project issues, including descriptions, status, assigned owner, and action
items for resolution. (Gemini in Sheets)
Before the project fully kicks off, you want to have standardized communication templates at your disposal.
For example, you want an email that can be used if an issue arises. You open a new Google Doc and prompt
Gemini in Docs by selecting Help me write. You type:
Draft an email template to announce when an issue arises and include causes, solutions, and timelines to
resolve it. (Gemini in Docs)
You like the template that Gemini in Docs creates, and you want to create an additional, slightly different email
template. In the same Google Doc, you prompt Gemini in Docs by selecting Help me write. You type:
Draft an email template to a stakeholder to escalate a critical project issue, outlining the impact and
proposed solution. (Gemini in Docs)
35
Sales
Understanding your customers inside and out is your
ticket to success. You’re in charge of maintaining
critical relationships, deciphering buying signals,
crafting tailored solutions, making data-driven calls,
and more.
Gemini for Google Workspace can help you redefine
productivity and foster meaningful client connections.
This section provides practical prompts and real-world
use cases designed specifically for you and your team.
Learning to write effective prompts will help improve
your productivity and streamline your everyday tasks,
giving you more time to focus on your customers by
using Gemini for Workspace.
Getting started
First, review the general prompt-writing tips on page 2 and the Prompting 101 section at the beginning of
this guide.
Each prompt below is presented with an accompanying scenario to serve as inspiration for how you can
collaborate with Gemini for Workspace. The prompt iteration example illustrates how you can continue to
write prompts to build on the initial generated response. We also provide examples of how different sales
roles can use Gemini for Workspace. You can adjust each prompt to accomplish common tasks and refine
the generated output.
Prompt iteration example
You’re an account executive, and you’ve just been assigned to a new customer. You need a research assistant.
You will need to get to know key contacts at the account to begin building trust between your teams, but first,
you want to send an introductory email, so you open Gmail and prompt Gemini in Gmail by selecting Help me
write. You type:
•
Write an email to [name], the new [title] at [company]. Congratulate them on their new role. Introduce me
as their contact point at [company name]. Invite them to lunch next week and check if they prefer Monday
or Tuesday. (Gemini in Gmail)
Persona •
Task •
Context •
Format
Gemini in Gmail: [Drafts email]
36
Gemini in Gmail
This provides a helpful starting point, but you want to try getting an even better response. You click
Refine > Formalize.
Gemini in Gmail
Gmail: [Generates refined email suggestions]
37
You’re happy with the email, so you click Insert. You read the message one last time, make final light edits
directly, and then you send the message. Now, you want to learn more about the customer and how it markets
itself. To research, you visit gemini.google.com and type:
I am an account executive in charge of a new account, [customer name]. What is the market strategy of [customer]? (gemini.google.com)
I need to do initial research.
gemini.google.com
Gemini provides you with useful information to get started in your research. You decide to go further in your
research by first focusing on news announcements. You gather a list of URLs, and you paste them into
your conversation with Gemini at gemini.google.com. You type:
Provide key insights and contextualize why these announcements
[URLs] Summarize these articles. are important. (gemini.google.com)
Now you have a clear summary of what was announced, why the news is important, and additional insights.
Next, you want to better understand the executive who will be your main point of contact. You find a recorded
interview featuring the executive. You paste the YouTube URL into your conversation with Gemini at gemini.
google.com and type:
[URL] Summarize this interview and tell me more about [executive name]. What does [executive] care
about? (gemini.google.com)
Now you have a succinct interview summary. You continue the conversation with additional lines of questioning
to build familiarity with your key contact and the account. You prompt:
Tell me how [company] can help [customer company] with achieving their goals. (gemini.google.com)
38
Once you wrap up your conversation, you export your results into a Google Doc. You open the Google Doc and
prompt Gemini in Docs. You type:
Create an email draft for [customer] explaining why achieve their market goals. (Gemini in Docs)
[your company] is the perfect partner for them to
Prompt guide
Sales Manager
Use case: Develop customer relationships
Your annual conference is coming up, and many of your most important customers will be there. You want to
personally invite them to a happy hour you’re hosting. You want to mix in a few prospects as well so that they
can network with existing customers. You open Gmail and prompt Gemini in Gmail by selecting Help me write.
You type:
Write an email inviting people interested in [focus area] to our happy hour taking place on [date, time] at
[trade show event]. Include that we specialize in [focus area]. (Gemini in Gmail)
Now that the event is over, you want to follow up with customers who came to the happy hour. You open Gmail
and prompt Gemini in Gmail by selecting Help me write. You type:
Draft an email thanking customers for their time at the happy hour on [date, time, location]. End with an
invitation to continue the conversations in the next few weeks. Use a friendly tone. (Gemini in Gmail)
In your event wrap-up activities, you also want to check in with the customers who attended the hands-on demo
workshops. They tested a few of the company’s new products, and their early feedback is important to the
team. You open a new Google Doc and prompt Gemini in Docs by selecting
Help me write. You type:
Draft 10 questions that I can use to survey customers about their recent experience with our [product/
service]. Include questions to gauge how useful [the product] is, what they liked, and what they thought
could use improvement. (Gemini in Docs)
Use case: Support the sales team
Unfortunately, a regional issue has arisen with the company’s services. You need to contact all of your team
leads in the Southeast region to provide immediate guidance on how to proactively reach out to customers.
You open Gmail and prompt Gemini in Gmail by selecting Help me write. You type:
Draft an email to all Southeast region sales leads. Inform them of [issues]. Advise them to communicate
with their teams to contact their customers and offer a 20% discount on a future order as an apology.
(Gemini in Gmail)
39
Now, you need to email all of the regional team members since they are closest to the customer feedback. You
open Gmail and prompt Gemini in Gmail by selecting Help me write. You type:
Draft an email to the regional sales representatives about an urgent meeting that needs to take place next
week about the [issues]. Ask them to provide availability on Monday or Tuesday. (Gemini in Gmail)
Use case: Coach and train the sales team
You’ve heard from many team members that they want more learning opportunities. You’re organizing a half-day
learning program to support this request. You need to create a schedule, so you open a new Google Doc and
prompt Gemini in Docs by selecting Help me write. You type:
Create a half-day agenda for an educational session on our latest technology [products] for sales teams.
Include time for the product development team to present and include time for lunch. (Gemini in Docs)
As a follow up to the team meeting, you want to highlight all of the different learning opportunities available
to the team. You need a way to organize this, so you open Google Sheets and you prompt Gemini in Sheets by
selecting Help me organize. You type:
Create a spreadsheet that tracks online courses for sellers. Include columns for the course’s main topic,
price, duration, and priority level. (Gemini in Sheets)
Account Manager and Account Executive
Use case: Build customer relationships
You just had a great call with a customer and now you want to use the notes you took from the meeting in
Google Docs to draft an email to the customer. In the Google Doc with your notes, you prompt Gemini in Docs
by selecting Help me write. You type:
Compose a personalized follow-up email to [client] following an initial conversation. Summarize the key
points we discussed and address any outstanding questions. (Gemini in Docs)
The account has just adopted one of the company’s service offerings and you need to ensure that they feel
supported during the onboarding process. You want to make sure you check in on how things are progressing
once a week, but you want to explore what the emails could look like. You open a new Google Doc and prompt
Gemini in Docs by selecting Help me write. You type:
Draft four email templates to check in on my customer weekly now that they have purchased our new
[service]. Use one value proposition (cost, ease of use, security, availability, and customization) as the
main topic for each email, and include [call to action] in each message. (Gemini in Docs)
40
Use case: Prepare for new customer calls
You have an upcoming call with a prospect. This is a brand new use case for you, and you need help preparing
for the call. You need help with initial research, so you visit gemini.google.com, and then you type:
Draft a customized script for me to follow during my sales call with a prospect. The call will happen over a
video call and is set to last 30 minutes. Make sure to add the following in the script: How [insert company
products/solutions] can help address potential customer’s pain points, how [company]’s delivery system
guarantees seamless and timely delivery, competitive pricing and volume-discount table, and space for
a customer reference in the [customer’s industry] industry. (gemini.google.com)
Now that you’ve done initial research, you export your findings to a new Google Doc. You open the Google Doc
so that you can continue working. Now, you want to create a tailored pitch. Using the Google Doc with all of your
research notes, you prompt Gemini in Docs by selecting Help me write. You type:
Generate an elevator pitch for [product name] and include key benefits, competitive points of
differentiation, and the pain points that [product name] solves for. (Gemini in Docs)
You have a great start to your elevator pitch and short talking points. You want to use this to further anticipate
how the customer call might go. You resume your meeting preparation by returning to gemini.google.com.
You type:
I have an upcoming call with a prospect. [Use case] is a new use case for me, and I need help preparing for
the call. List the most likely objections [customer] might have for me during a sales call, with suggestions
on how to respond to them. I work in [insert industry], and I am trying to sell [product]. Also provide ideas
on how to handle objections and suggest ways to respond. (gemini.google.com)
Business Development Manager
Use case: Nurture relationships, personalized outreach, and thought leadership
You’re hoping to build deeper relationships with prospective customers that you met at a business influencers
networking event. You want to draft a template that you can customize for multiple contacts. You open a new
Google Doc, and you prompt Gemini in Docs by selecting Help me write. You type:
Draft an outreach email template to industry influencers. Express gratitude that we connected at [event],
and propose collaboration opportunities such as [opportunities]. (Gemini in Docs)
41
After having a successful call with prospective customers, you want to follow up with thought leadership content
from your founder that they may find interesting. You open the Google Doc with the blog post, and prompt
Gemini in Docs by selecting Help me write. You type:
Summarize this blog content in bullet points and generate three ideas for follow-up questions I can ask my
customers about their thoughts. (Gemini in Docs)
Use case: Generate personalized customer onboarding materials
You’ve onboarded a few new major accounts, and now you want to personally thank your customers and check
in to see if there’s anything else you can provide. You open Gmail and prompt Gemini in Gmail by selecting Help
me write. You type:
Generate a personalized email for [customer] on their one-month anniversary working with [company].
Thank them for being a customer. Ask them if they have any questions. Include information about [other
product]. (Gemini in Gmail)
You also want to send these customers a gift to congratulate them on your new partnership. You open Google
Sheets and prompt Gemini in Sheets by selecting Help me organize. You type:
Give me a list of gifts to send new clients that are under $200 and can be shipped to offices.
(Gemini in Sheets)
42
Leveling up your prompt writing
This guide is meant to serve as inspiration, but the possibilities are nearly endless with Gemini for Google
Workspace. Try these additional tips to build on your prompt-writing skills.
•
•
•
•
•
•
Break it up. If you want Gemini for Workspace to perform several related tasks, break them into
separate prompts.
Give constraints. To generate specific results, include details in your prompt such as character count limits
or the number of options you’d like to generate.
Assign a role. To encourage creativity, assign a role. You can do this by starting your prompt with language
like: “You are the head of a creative department for a leading advertising agency …”
Ask for feedback. In your conversation with Gemini at gemini.google.com, tell it that you’re giving it a project,
include all the details you have and everything you know, and then describe the output you want. Continue the
conversation by asking questions like, “What questions do you have for me that would help you provide the
best output?”
Consider tone. Tailor your prompts to suit your intended audience and desired tone of the content.
Ask for a specific tone such as formal, informal, technical, creative, or casual in the output.
Say it another way. Fine-tune your prompts if the results don’t meet your expectations or if you believe
there’s room for improvement. An iterative process of review and refinement often yields better results.
43
Generative AI and all of its possibilities are exciting, but it’s still new.
Even though our models are getting better every day, our prompts can
sometimes have unpredictable responses.
Before putting an output from Gemini for Workspace into action, review
it to ensure clarity, relevance, and accuracy. And of course the most
important thing to keep in mind: Generative AI is meant to help humans
but the final output is yours.
The example prompts in this guide are meant for illustrative purposes.
Stay up to date
at workspace.google.com
and workspace.google.com/blog
Happy prompting!
44
44
45