Reskilling in the Age of AI
Harvard Business Review · by Jorge Tamayo · September 1, 2023
Talent management
Five new paradigms for leaders—and employees

From the Magazine (September–October 2023)

Noma Bar
Summary.

In the coming decades, as the pace of technological change continues to increase, millions of workers may need to be not just upskilled but reskilled—a profoundly complex societal challenge that will sometimes require workers to both acquire new skills and change occupations entirely. Companies have a critical role to play in addressing this challenge, but to date few have taken it seriously. To learn more about what their role will entail, the authors—members of a collaboration between the Digital Data Design Institute at Harvard’s Digital Reskilling Lab and the Boston Consulting Group’s Henderson Institute—interviewed leaders at some 40 organizations around the world that are investing in large-scale reskilling programs. In synthesizing what they learned, they became aware of five paradigm shifts that are emerging in reskilling: (1) Reskilling is a strategic imperative. (2) It is the responsibility of every leader and manager. (3) It is a change-management initiative. (4) Employees want to reskill—when it makes sense. (5) It takes a village. The authors argue that companies will need to understand and embrace these shifts if they hope to succeed in adapting dynamically to the rapidly evolving new era of automation and AI.

Leer en españolLer em português
Back in 2019 the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development made a bold forecast. Within 15 to 20 years, it predicted, new automation technologies were likely to eliminate 14% of the world’s jobs and radically transform another 32%. Those were sobering numbers, involving more than 1 billion people globally—and they didn’t even factor in ChatGPT and the new wave of generative AI that has recently taken the market by storm.

Read more on Talent management or related topics Employee retention, Developing employees, Automation and AI and machine learning
A version of this article appeared in the September–October 2023 issue of Harvard Business Review.
JT
is an assistant professor in the Strategy Unit at Harvard Business School.
LD
Leila Doumi is a PhD candidate in the Strategy Unit at Harvard Business School.
SG
Sagar Goel is a managing director and partner at Boston Consulting Group, Singapore, and a fellow at the BCG Henderson Institute.
OO
Orsolya Kovács-Ondrejkovic is an associate director at Boston Consulting Group, Zurich, and an ambassador at the BCG Henderson Institute.

Raffaella Sadun is the Charles E. Wilson Professor of Business Administration at Harvard Business School and a co-chair of its Managing the Future of Work project.
Read more on Talent management or related topics Employee retention, Developing employees, Automation and AI and machine learning
Harvard Business Review · by Jorge Tamayo · September 1, 2023
SUMMARY
HIGHLIGHTS
Loading...